_Beggary laws persist in Indian jurisprudence despite
evidence of abuse and presumption of criminality
among the "ostensibly poor". A quartet of encounters
with the law, in Mumbai and in Delhi, provides a context
to exploring the relationship between poverty and
criminality, and the extensive loss of rights that emerge
as a consequence._

_Beggary laws have begun to demonstrate how the law
may be made, continued, expanded and practised when
the constituency affected by the laws are powerless --- so
rendered by the illegality that the law visits on them, the
prejudice that poverty provokes, the distance between
privilege and poverty, and the vanishing obligations of
the state._

_The Bombay (Prevention of Begging) Act 1959, in
particular, has led to the callous treatment of those who
are "ostensibly poor" and in the denial of rights to them,
thereby rendering itself unconstitutional. It is therefore
necessary to repeal the law._

\ 

The crackdown on the urban poor in Delhi has been on for
some time. Aspirations to create a global city, the Commonwealth
Games 2010, the desire of the city's more prosperous
denizens to banish the poor and their poverty to locations in
which they have no interest has each acted as provocation. In this
midst is the complicity of the law and judicial _dicta_ which foists
illegality on the poor, and allows an easy presumption of potential
criminality. A stunning instance of an area of law that has accumulated
a baggage of crime and wrongdoing by the law enforcers is
found in the law relating to ostensible poverty. In the law's rendering,
though, it is ostensible poverty, in and of itself, that could be the
crime. Ostensible poverty may require no specific, or even general,
act or conduct to acquire the attributes of criminality; dire poverty
that is visible, and witnessed in public spaces, could attract the
exercise of the authority of law. The class of persons who may be
the intended subjects of a law that deals with this phenomenon of
ostensible poverty have been identified as "status offenders";[^/1] that is,
they offend by being who they are, and not by doing what they do.

Laws dealing with the context of beggary are vivid, and obvious,
illustrations of this phenomenon. The Bombay (Prevention
of Begging) Act 1959 (BPBA), which was extended to Delhi in
1960, has acquired a wealth of experience over the years, providing
stark proof of the inherent injustice of this law and laws of
similar ilk. A quartet of encounters with the law, in Mumbai and
in Delhi, provides a context to exploring the relationship between
poverty and criminality, and the extensive loss of rights that
emerge as a consequence. It reflects on the depleting obligation
of the state where poverty persists, and the onus cast on the person
in poverty to procure gainful employment or, at the least, to
make poverty invisible. Interestingly, this is a law without a
"good faith" clause[^/2] --- the element that is routinely introduced
into legislations to protect persons acting under the law from being
prosecuted by a presumption of "good faith". Yet, documented
excesses in the guise of enforcing the BPBA 1959 have not led to
the prosecution and punishment of those abusing their power;
nor has it resulted in changes in the law to prevent, or at least
discourage, the exploiting of the already vulnerable. This marginalisation,
and exiling from constitutional treatment, of the
ostensibly poor stands demonstrated. This can reasonably lead to
only one conclusion: that the law relating to begging and ostensible
poverty is insupportable as well as unconstitutional, and must
be either repealed, or struck down by a court which possesses the
power to test a legislation for its constitutionality.

These remarks anticipate the narrative. To start at the beginning,
first, the law.

\ 

**The Law to Prevent Beggary**: There are three ways in which a
person may fall within the net of the BPBA 1959: by definition,[^/3] by
being dependent on a person who is convicted of beggary,[^/4] and
by "employing or causing persons to beg or using them for
purposes of begging"[^/5]

\ 

**Ostensible Poverty**: The direct, and most practised, way is by
definition. "Soliciting or receiving alms in a public place, whether
or not under any pretence of singing, dancing, fortune-telling,
performing or offering any article for sale"[^/6] could constitute
"begging". So too could "entering on any private premises for the
purpose of soliciting or receiving alms",[^/7] or exposing or exhibiting
wounds, injuries or deformities to "extort" alms, or allowing
oneself to be used an exhibit.[^/8] And, in an effort to extend the
exercise of authority to all of ostensible poverty, "begging"
includes "having no visible means of subsistence and, wandering
about or remaining in a public place in such condition or manner,
as makes it likely that the person doing so exists by soliciting or
receiving alms".[^/9]

The effect of this overbroad generalisation has been documented
over the years. In a student investigation into the administration
of the beggary law in Delhi conducted between 1976 and
1979, they found Chottan Choudhary, a man in frail health who
had lost his right arm below the elbow and which "natural disability
exposed him to a very high degree of risk of arrest".[^/10]
He had been arrested several times, although the students
were able to track his livelihood to a small grocery store that
he ran.[^/11]

In 1990, when Manjula Sen, a journalist, filed a public interest
litigation (PIL) in the Bombay High Court challenging the constitutionality
of the BPBA 1959 and the tyranny under the law that
had become standard practice, she cited the case of Rajguru, 16
years of age, a bootblack who was "caught outside Churchgate
station while he was sleeping during the day on November 15, 1989.
He protested ... "(that) he was not a beggar but a shoe-polisher
but to no effect. Although he was a child \[under the Juvenile
Justice Act 1986\], his age was deliberately entered as 19 ...
The interesting thing is that Rajguru is handicapped. He has
only one hand. Because of this, he was presumed to be a beggar
and arrested".[^/12]

In an assessment of two beggars' homes in Delhi done by a
senior civil servant of the Delhi government following reports of
inhuman conditions in the institutions, Gyanendra Dhar Badgaiyan
wrote, in March 2001:

>Wrong people are being arrested by the anti-beggary squad. One
reason for this possibly is that the squads are venal. This was established
beyond doubt by an internal inquiry \[conducted by Mr A K
Sinha, District Officer, Social Welfare Department\]. It confirmed that
in the case of one Mr Gyan Chand Gupta, a retired clerk, the squad
released him after snatching ₹9,000 of the pension money that he
was carrying. His only crime was that he was dressed shabbily. That
this may not have been an isolated case was pointed out by the inquiry
itself, which suggested that the squad regularly indulged in such
malpractices. During interviews ... , inmate after inmate complained
that they were hauled up only because they could not pay the hundred
rupees bribe demanded of them. Some of them at least, like the retired
clerk referred to above, may not be beggars but may have just looked
like one at the time of their arrest.[^/13]

Significantly, a committee appointed by the Bombay High
Court on the basis of Manjula Sen's petition, having accompanied
the "police squad" and followed through on the working of the
BPBA 1959 on the street and in the court, concluded:[^/14]

>\(1) The arrest is made of the people who are found on the street in
>dirty clothes and wandering. They are not actually found begging
>
> ...
>
>\(4) Large number of wrong arrests are made which is inhumane and
>unjust.
>
> ...
>
>\(7) There is no criteria to decide as to who is a beggar, who is sick,
>physically handicapped or in need of economic help.

# 'Raids' and 'Rounding Up'

Relying on perceptions of the feckless poor has allowed for
conducting raids, and rounding up "beggars". The students of
Delhi University reported meeting "beggars" "who had been
picked up from all over town in the recent raid".[^/15] The high court
appointed committee in Bombay observed in court that "when
the members (of the committee) left the police vehicle there were
only six beggars and when they were produced in the court, there
were 21 which is a large number. The feeling that one gathers is
that the procedure they adopted to arrest the beggars was different
when the committee members were present, whereas the
arrest later on perhaps was different".[^/16]

The breadth of identity by definition, and the idea of presumed
criminality of the ostensibly poor, has clearly settled comfortably
into the reading and rendition of the law. The perception of the
proximate poor as fearful and threatening has proved to be easy
to accommodate within this expanded relationship between
poverty and crime. The invocation of the BPBA 1959 to put away a
community of persons who the law projects as offenders and,
therefore, as persons whose criminal propensity need not be
doubted, is a striking statement about the remarkable power of
the definition.

# Fear, Poverty and Presumed Criminality

In July 2006, a criminal complaint was lodged in the court of the
additional metropolitan magistrate in New Delhi. This was sent
on to the high court, where it is presently pending. The immediate
provocation was the "harassment by the lepers at Ashram
Crossing near Maharani Bagh, New Delhi".[^/17]

It was

>submitted that on February 13, 2006, the leper in a blue _lungi_ who
used to harass and threaten our member at the Ashram Crossing again
threatened (her) with dire consequences in case (she) reported the
matter to the police in order to stop him from begging at the Ashram
Crossing. The leper in blue _lungi_ told our member to give him money,
otherwise (she) would be kidnapped and taken to the _basti_ of lepers
where (she) would be touched by the lepers so that (she) would get
affected by the disease of leprosy.[^/18]

Complaints to the police resulting in a mere suspension, and
return, of the beggars at Ashram Crossing, "our member again
saw the same leper who had threatened (her) ... Our member was
scared and mentally disturbed that the leper _might try to take
revenge and may harm_ as he had earlier threatened our member"
(emphasis added). A further reappearance of the beggars, after a
temporary cessation of their activities following sustained
pressure on the police to act, had "our member ... again threatened
and (she) _apprehends danger to life_ as (she) has been threatened
that (she) can even be murdered in case (she) reports the matter
to the police".[^/19]

There were references in the letter of referral to the high court
by the ACMM[^/20]

- To some, unspecified, members of the New Delhi Bar Association
being accosted and threatened by beggars;
- To reports in "some news channels including Channel 7 and
CNN-IBN" on July 29, 2006 and July 30, 2006 "regarding the
involvement of some doctors in a racket of cutting healthy limbs
of human beings for the purposes of begging";[^/21]
- The "illegal activities" of "anti-social elements and goondas"
increasing "at the Ashram Crossing and in the nearby localities as
is evident from the murder of two lady advocates" of the Delhi
High Court.[^/22]

What followed, however, has little, if any, relevance to these
last two incidents, although, surely, they must have been
perceived to be somehow related. In the event, the department of
social welfare, National Capital Territory of Delhi "recently
conducted a special drive to apprehend beggars from September
2, 2006 to September 8, 2006 and apprehended 53 beggars.
Besides this, the department conducted 31 raids during the
period from May 3, 2006 to October 5, 2006 in various localities
in south Delhi, namely, Maharani Bagh, Ashram, Moolchand
crossing, South Extension and Lodhi Road and apprehended 133 beggars".[^/23]

Between April and October 9, 2006, 619 persons had been
apprehended as beggars by the department of social welfare, and 40
persons had been pulled in by the police.[^/24] In a display of institutional
competitiveness while reporting to the high court, the
"status report" of the department of social welfare "submitted
that the respondent-department has already apprehended more
number of beggars than the police authorities within the limited
resources and personnel available"[^/25] despite "apprehending
beggars" being a responsibility "primarily cast on the police".[^/26]

In a status report February 2, 2007, the DCP (south) claimed to
have detained 63 beggars between August 1, 2006 and November
25, 2006, even as the department of social welfare had
"intensified their drive of detaining the beggars from public
places".[^/27] In the status report of the department of social welfare
filed pursuant to directions of the high court dated January 9,
2007, it was

>further submitted that the respondent-department has started
>conducting regular raids with the assistance of police, districtwise.
>During the month of January 2007, 294 beggars were apprehended,
>which includes 263 male, 25 female and six children.
>
>In view of the aforesaid averments and reports annexed \[of the number
>of persons apprehended as beggars, released, acquitted and committed
>in 2005 and 2006\] it is submitted that the respondent department
>is taking steps to apprehend more number of beggars within the
>resources and personnel available.[^/28]

This exercise in clearing the streets had begun as "a criminal
complaint ... regarding harassment and threat extended by beggars/lepers
to one of the lady members of the complainant association
\[the New Delhi Bar Association\] at Ashram Chowk".[^/29] More
specifically, it was an exchange that the lawyer had with a "leper in a
blue _lungi_" that constituted the provocation. While hundreds of
persons were being apprehended and detained as beggars, the
department of social welfare reports having requested the lawyer

>to identify the offender and to provide all other evidences/witnesses
in this regard so that the investigation in this case may be completed
expeditiously. In view of detention of large number of beggars by
police and social welfare department, Ms S was requested to try to
identify the offenders from the detainees but she has declined the
request saying that the accused leper is not there at Ashram Chowk
now and that if she is shown the photographs of all the detainees, she
can identify the offender's photograph. Accordingly, Ms S has been
provided with the photographs of all the beggars detained in beggar's
house during last one and a half year (approximately 1,100). She could
not identify any person from the photographs.[^/30]

In the meantime, so as "to keep the identity of some of its
members secret ... since (they) were apprehending danger and
threat to their lives",[^/31] the president of the New Delhi Bar Association
(NDBA), and not the lawyer, was directed to be registered as
the complainant. Significantly, in the case, the case was variously
listed in the name of _New Delhi Bar Association vs Commissioner
of Police_ or _Court on Its Own Motion vs In re: Begging in Public_, or
_Court on Its Own Motion vs Commissioner of Police_, both adverting
to the same case indicating the consanguinity of interest of
the court and the complainant. The "_vs In re: Begging in Public_" is
a statement on the intolerance of ostensible poverty. By February
2, 2007, the "informant, Ms S, advocate was contacted but she
refused to divulge any information saying that she is not a
complainant in this matter and showed her helplessness in
providing any further assistance".[^/32]

The non-cooperation of the complainant on whose fears and
apprehensions hundreds of persons were rounded up as beggars,
and her "refus(al) to divulge any information" because she was
no longer, formally, the complainant is tolerated by the law. It, in
fact, reaches beyond tolerance. For, on July 30, 2007, the court
records the lawyer-complainant's protest when the amicus
curiae[^/33] suggested that, since 95% of the inmates that he
had met were from states outside Delhi and were willing to be
sent back to their states of origin, they may be released under the
law.[^/34] The court records that the lawyer "apprehends mayhem on
the streets of Delhi like rape, murder and loot, making the life of
citizens totally unsafe if the beggars who, according to her, are in
fact criminals are allowed to be set free."[^/35]

# Paucity of Debate

The equation of a state of poverty with criminality, and the
extreme inequality of power in activating the law, and in being
heard, is self-evident. What is striking is the paucity of debate on
how such prejudice, and such imbalances in power, continue to
be entrenched in law. How is it that a law can lay claim to constitutionality
even when its very existence can be the basis for mass
action against the ostensibly poor, set off by fears and perceptions
of threat, while the persons under attack get objectified and
become completely "right-less?"

There is no evidence that these preventive arrests have
captured any space in the public arena of dispute, contention and
challenge beyond the case initiated in the court. The connection
between the crackdown on ostensible poverty and the invisibilising
of the violations practised on those who are publicly poor
could explain this in part. That invisibilising the role of law and
authority in the lives of those in ostensible poverty has persisted,
despite the abuse of power and the extremes of right-less-ness
exploding anecdotally on the scene, points to a complicity
among those with the capacity to make, or influence, law, policy
and practice. Implicit in this invisibilising, and complicity, is a
hierarchy of constitutional citizenship, where the "right to life"
of a class of persons includes a range of rights and freedoms
including freedom from insecurity and fear, and the right not to
be accosted by that which is a nuisance or which is aesthetically
disturbing. What may be displaced in the process may well be
life, liberty, freedom of expression, the right against torture,
the right to live with one's family, freedom from fear and everyday
threat and the disappearance of state obligation in relation
to another class of persons. It is difficult to conceive of such a
legal order as being constitutional or just.

In the court, the case is currently being processed, and some
responses will eventually emerge. Reflecting on the law need
not, however, bide the verdict. In part, there is the assistance that
another recent pronouncement of the Delhi High Court provides
in unravelling the import of the definition and, more generally,
of the law.

_Ram Lakhan vs State_[^/36] was a challenge to a conviction under
the BPBA 1959 based on a finding that the person before the court
was a "beggar". The metropolitan magistrate had imposed a
sentence of one year, which had been reduced to six months by
the additional sessions judge while setting aside the conviction
since the only witnesses were the two police officers who had
picked him up when they were on an "anti-begging raid", and
even they had not testified to being witness to anyone giving
money to the petitioner. While deciding the case, and acquitting
the person charged of beggary, the judge considered the act of
begging, and its promptings, to understand what the law could
possibly mean. Imbedded in this analysis was an exploration of
what could constitute motive and intention that could constitute
offending conduct. After all, as the judge explained, it is not all
solicitation of alms that is illegal; a person may be given a
"permit" to solicit alms and that would make the otherwise
illegal act legal.[^/37] As a court in New York had remarked in The
_People of the State of New York vs Eric Shrader_,[^/38] surely "no
rational distinction can be made", when considering the
freedom of expression aspect of begging, "between the message
involved, whether the person standing in the corner says 'help
me, I'm homeless', or 'help the homeless'"[^/39] --- and it is the latter
that the law may support while the definition that makes a
crime of begging "is essentially targeted at solicitation of alms
by individuals".[^/40]

# Reasons behind Begging

"Why does a person beg?",[^/41] the judge asked, as a prelude to
applying his judgment to who may have the heavy hand of the
law laid on them. The act of solicitation may be similar, but the
impulse may vary; and the law's logic ought to be able to sustain
the treatment meted out under its aegis. Or such is the reasoning
which underlies this decision. So, a person may beg because
"he is downright lazy and doesn't want to work".[^/42] Or, "he may
be an alcoholic or a drug addict in the hunt for financing his
next drink or dose".[^/43] Or, "he may be at the exploitative mercy
of a ring leader of a beggary 'gang'".[^/44] Or, "there is also the
probability that he may be starving, homeless and helpless".[^/45]
Even as the BPBA 1959 does not, apparently, draw distinctions
among these "four different kinds of 'beggars",[^/46] there is scope
enough in the law "to treat them differently as, indeed, they
should be".[^/47] Maybe professional beggars "who find it easier to
beg than to work"[^/48] could appropriately be dealt with by detention
in a certified institution. But, "begging" is not the problem
when it is addiction, or exploitation, that drives the person to
the act of begging; de-addiction, or release from the exploitative
clutches may hold the solution.[^/49] As for those "driven to beg
for alms and food as they are starving or their families are in
hunger ... \[t\]hey beg to survive; to remain alive".[^/50] "For any
civilised society", the judge observed, "to have persons belonging
to this category is a disgrace and a _failure of the state_. To
subject them to further ignominy and deprivation by ordering
their detention in a certified institution is nothing short of
dehumanising them. ... Prevention of begging is the object of
the said Act. But, one must realise that embedded in this object
are the twin goals --- Nobody should beg and nobody should
need to beg".[^/51]

In 1959, Gore and his colleagues at the Delhi School of Social
Work had said of the law:

>\[I\]t may be noted that in the face of a general economic maladjustment,
little good can be done to beggars by merely passing deterrent
and punitive legislation. ... Thus ... All the legislative and other
attempts have been directed to solving the problem at a stage when a
person has actually taken to begging, but little has been done to meet
the economic and other needs on their first appearance.[^/52]

Since 1950, the Directive Principles of State Policy in the
Constitution had adverted specifically to providing social security
to meet all cases of "undeserved want" --- an aspect which, unfortunately,
has had hardly any jurisprudence developing around it.

Given the context, the judge adopted the "doctrine of
necessity".[^/53] The factors that the BPBA 1959 required the court to
consider included "helplessness, poverty and duress"[^/54] There is,
too, the aspect of soliciting alms being, in effect and in its
practice, an exercise of "freedom of speech and expression".
What, as the judge asked, does the beggar do? "After all, begging
involves the beggar displaying his miserable plight by words or
actions and requesting for alms by words (spoken or written) or
actions. Does the starving man not have a fundamental right to
inform a more fortunate soul that he is starving and request for
food?"[^/55] And would the consequence of being detained and
denied his liberty not run "counter to the fundamental right to
speech and expression?"[^/56]

The judge specifically clarified that this delineation of the
contours of the law was not meant to conclude that begging
cannot be prohibited.[^/57] What it meant was that the prohibition,
and its penal consequences, would have to be within the "reasonable
restrictions" enunciated in the Constitution.[^/58] And, where
"no legitimate alternative to begging" was evident, pre-fixing a
"condition that he is not likely to beg again and suffix(ing) ... the
requirement of furnishing a bond for abstaining from begging"
and for "good behaviour" "would be wholly inappropriate where
a person begs out of sheer necessity or compulsion".[^/59]

The prejudices within the judicial process which the judge
notices are telling:

>* The metropolitan magistrate had recorded that "the accused was
>found begging by raising his front paws from the passers by"[^/60] It
>moved the irate judge to exclaim: "Beggars are not beasts with claws!
>They are human beings and they should be treated as such.[^/61]
>* The Social Investigation Report had found him to be a 'habitual
>beggar'. The court has acted on this finding. At no point had the person
>to be detained on the count of being a habitual beggar been allowed to
>explain, controvert or contest the report. There was no legal obligation
>recognised to hear what he had to say.
>* There was a further "ugly twist".[^/62] He had been detained in a certified
>institution set up under the BPBA 1959. Yet, he was sent to Tihar
>jail, contrary to the law, and there he remained for close to a month,
>till the court summoned him to its presence.[^/63]

On one side, then, is choicelessness, necessity and, often,
undeserved want, On another, the Constitution, the law and
institutions that could be legitimately expected to protect the
rights and interests of those less equal than others. On still
another, are prejudice, presumption, practice and a priority of
interests that determines the constituency of the law.

The BPBA 1959 had not been challenged in the case before the
high court in _Ram Lakhan_; it was action taken under the law that
had been brought into question. The judge was inhibited by the
way the case was posed to limit himself to "an examination of
(the) aspects touching upon the constitutional validity"[^/64] of the
BPBA 1959 as applied to Delhi. The Bombay High Court was not so
constrained when dealing with _Manjula Sen vs Superintendent_,
_Beggars' Home_.[^/65] In an "oral judgment" delivered in court on
July 16, 1990, a single judge set up a committee of five persons
investigate a range of issues emerging from the law and practice
of the BPBA 1959, charging them, specifically, with suggesting a
"method of implementation" of the BPBA 1959 or "amendments to
the Act and Rules for achieving the objective of the Act".[^/66] There
was especial emphasis on the circumstances in which "rounding
up" of beggars may be done; and an invitation to make recommendations
on "whether any legal aid is to be given to those who
are rounded up under the provisions of the Beggars Act".[^/67]

The committee adopted a method of inquiry that included
visiting the homes housing those picked up under the BPBA 1959,
collecting data on the capacity of homes and the occupancy, diet
and medical facilities, and the meaning given to "rehabilitation"
within the institutions. It sought, and obtained, the opinion of
experts on the law. Legislation in other countries including Hong
Kong and Singapore were consulted. The members of the committee
witnessed raids, and the process in the court. They explored
the significance of various agencies of state in relation to the BPBA
1959, including the police, the probation officers, the lawyers, the
staff of custodial institutions and the social welfare department.
When the exercise was completed, the unanimous and unhesitating
recommendation was that the BPBA 1959 is "totally outdated
and cannot achieve the stated objectives . ... and therefore needs
to be abolished without any delay"[^/68] In setting out this conclusion,
the committee found support in the opinion of Satyaranjan
Sathe, a highly regarded teacher and expert in constitutional,
administrative and public interest law. In his note to the committee,
his scathing remarks on the law included these: "This whole
law is an attempt to treat street poverty as a law and order
problem".[^/69] "This is actually a preventive detention under the
garb of punitive detention".[^/70] "Those who are forced to beg by
circumstances ought not to be treated as offenders of the law.
They need a healing touch of the protective law, not the deterrence
of a criminal sanction".[^/71]

Heeding this advice which was bolstered by what they had
witnessed, the committee recommended the introduction of "a
new law which will be in tune with modern thought".[^/72]

Such a law, it said, must ---

- Redefine begging, narrowing it down, and drawing a distinction
between destitution and beggary,[^/73] and placing only professional
beggars within a regime of restraint and punishment.
Decriminalise begging, and establish welfare homes which
persons in situations of helplessness may access, voluntarily, and
where they may "seek shelter, training and rehabilitation".[^/74]
- Discontinue the institution of beggars' courts. "It is reported",
the committee said, "that about 100 cases are disposed in less
than 15 minutes".[^/75] On the day that the committee had witnessed
proceedings in the court, there had been 33 cases on remand and 21
new cases. "When the names of the new cases beggars were
called", the committee recorded in its report to the high court, "the
judge had just glanced at them and remanded them to custody in
the beggars home. Out of the 33 remand cases, most of them (31)
were released and only two were detained. The whole proceeding
was over in 8 minutes".[^/76] "Looking at a face and deciding the fate
of a person", the committee had said, "was shocking to the members
witnessing the proceedings".[^/77] "Therefore", the committee found
it impelled to recommend, "these so-called beggars' courts be
discontinued as they will not be needed under the new Act".[^/78]
- Strengthen supervision of the workings of the BPBA 1959, for
"regular inspection, field counselling and management control
seems to be tragically absent".[^/79]
- Establish cost effectiveness. The institutionalising of control
over the poor, rather than concern with the needs of those in
poverty is evidenced in the committee's statement that: "It should
be considered whether it is worthwhile to maintain a beggar's
home for 400 beggars spending ₹30 lakh per year. It would be
far better to introduce some social security system (public assistance
with supervision). This would enable to cover (sic) far more
people and with better facilities and programmes."[^/80]
- Re-establish committees, enhance people's participation. In the
Male Beggars' Home, it seemed that there had been no visiting
committee in over 15 years.[^/81] In the Female Beggars' Home, no
visiting committee had held any meeting since 1969.[^/82] This
neglect, it was suggested, had resulted in the decline in this area
of the working of the law.
  - Include participation of voluntary organisations.
  - Train staff.
  - Remodel vocational training.
  - Provide for public assistance which, in any event, is also more
  "economical than institutionalisation".
  - Start sponsorship programmes.
  - Promote organised charity.
- Reorganise medical work, for, "case workers, doctors and quasi-medical
doctors in beggars' homes appear to suffer the blight of
ignorance, apathy and incompetence, more so in case of the
female beggars who suffer from mental disorder and male
beggars who suffer from leprosy".[^/83]

Even as these were intended to be indicative of where the
committee believed a new act should be headed, it was "unanimous
on this Report and feels very strongly about the need for a
new Act and establishment of welfare homes".[^/84]

This categorical denunciation of the BPBA 1959 after an elaborate
exercise undertaken at the behest of a high court has, plainly,
not had any effect on the letter of the law, or in its practice.[^/85] The
BPBA 1959 remains unchanged. Raids continue. Institutions are
horrific and have not the faintest connection with humane, or
even formal constitutionally justifiable, conditions. Destitution
and undeserved want are still crimes despite judicial engagement
that challenges the irrationality and injustice of such treatment.
And the extreme inequality of power that is aggravated by the
law persists resulting, as witnessed in 2007 in Delhi, in the ostensible
poor, as a class, becoming vulnerable to being punished for
being publicly poor.

# Excesses in the Law

Episodically, evidence has accumulated about the impunity that
has developed through apathy and the casual disregard of law in
dealing with ostensible poverty. The law, too, bears bold signatures
of unconstitutionality which, if it had affected classes more
proximate to power, would assuredly have faced severe tests in
courts, legislatures and on the streets of democratic protest. A
read through the law would produce, for instance ---

* The power invested in a police officer or anyone else that the
government may authorise to "arrest without warrant any person
who is found begging".[^/86]
* Once produced in court, they would be subjected to a "summary
trial" preceded by a "summary inquiry".[^/87]
* If "the court is satisfied that such person was found begging",[^/88]
the sentence could be an admonishing and release on a bond
"requiring the beggar to abstain from begging and to be of good
behaviour",[^/89] or be ordered "to be detained in a certified institution
for a period of not less than one year, but not more than
three years".[^/90] There is a third possibility, of requiring the person
to report to the commissioner of police or district magistrate,[^/91]
but the point of this possibility is unstated and obscure.
* A person previously detained in a certified institution found
begging again shall be detained for two to three years.[^/92] And,
when convicted for the second or subsequent time, the court
"shall order him to be detained for a period of 10 years", and may
even convert up to two years of that detention into a "sentence of
imprisonment",[^/93] revealing a nexus that the law sees between
poverty and common criminality.
* When such detention occurs, and after the court has made
"such inquiry as it thinks fit", it may "order any other person
who is wholly dependent on such person to be detained in a
certified institution for a like period",[^/94] with the concession to
due process that such person shall be given an opportunity to be
heard on why such an order of detention should not be made.[^/95]
This is guilt by association and, along with destitution, makes a
crime of dependency.
* Every person detained in a certified institution "shall at any
time allow his fingerprints to be taken" by the police or magistracy.[^/96]
This would include all those who have been "rounded up"
and brought in "raids". Were they to refuse to allow their fingerprints
to be taken, they shall be liable, on conviction, to have
their period of detention "not exceeding three months converted
to a term of imprisonment extending to a like period".[^/97] The
invasion of privacy of persons who stand accused has, in recent
times, been sought to be justified as being necessary to meet the
extraordinary situation created by terrorism. This has generated
much debate and dissent, but, even there, there is no talk (at
least, not yet) of punishment for refusing to allow the violation
of privacy.

The Delhi High Court has spoken of "its wish to give certain
directions with regard to biometric identification of beggars as
also the creation of a Personal Data Bank" which, the court
suggests, "will help the authorities to keep a tab on the beggars
who are repeat offenders as also whether rehabilitation is
working or not".[^/98] The "existing system at Tihar jail" which
houses undertrials and convicts provided the inspiration.[^/99] By
early December 2007, the amicus appointed by the court reported
that the Delhi administration had taken its cue from the court to
begin to set the process in place for introducing biometric identification
of those roped into the system as beggars.[^/100] There are
questions of constitutionality of this procedure which may
never get asked or answered unless constitutional advocacy
triumphs over administrative procedure-making. There are
also questions that arise about the purpose of this exercise. In a
system where people in conditions of poverty are numerous;
the state system offers no social security or opportunity for
overcoming economic redundancy, nor does it desist from
implementing policies that render many unemployable; where
rehabilitation and training have never been pursued; where the
state's willingness and capacity to aid the ostensibly poor stands
seriously depleted --- what would a roster of the ostensibly poor
do? There are no consequences to the state or any of its officers
or agencies if they do not improve the possibilities of those
dragged into the net of this law. What, then, is the point of the
introduction of this invasive technique of surveillance surely
deserves some explanation?

# The Fig Leaf

The law, as it stands, places the onus on those in destitution not
to continue to be ostensibly poor when it equates "good
behaviour" with taking themselves off the streets. It lets the
notion of state obligation vanish almost without a trace, but for
references to rehabilitation and training. The failure to deliver
on rehabilitation, it would appear, has done nothing to deflect
the control and authority of the state; it has consequences only
for those in destitution.

In 1959, Gore had noticed that the laws governing beggary
were not meticulous in their treatment of rehabilitation. Yet, their
study had found there has been attempts by those running certified
institutions to send the inmates to factories where they could
earn wages, or engage some of them in work within the institutions.
How far this would take them towards finding honest work
when it became time to leave the institution was, however, "yet
to be seen". The importance of the possibilities with which
convicted beggars left the institution was heightened because "if
such a beggar does not succeed in finding a living by his own
efforts, it becomes his crime which is sought to be punished with
seven to 10 years of detention" in the different state laws. Yet, no
state had dwelt on rehabilitation, and, in the Hyderabad Act, "the
provision for training, employment and education in these institutions
is optional. To that extent, these Acts fail to accomplish
their objective of preventing beggary"[^/101] The record reflects an
erosion of even that which was attempted in the early years.

In 1990, the College of Social Work, Bombay had said: "There
are several sections mentioned under the office record supposed
to be for the purpose of training and occupation of the inmates.
However, it is obvious that the so-called 'facilities' are just a
misnomer for utilising free labour for the cleaning, upkeep and
maintenance of the home. The so-called areas of training are
actually inoperative. These (i.e., the 'so-called areas') are, for the
male section, pin-making, tailoring, broom-making and weaving.
In the female section, out of the facilities of broom-making and
tailoring, only tailoring is in operation".[^/102]

In 2001, Badgaiyan had said: "the most significant lacuna is
regarding provision of training infrastructure ... The home
management ... has failed to generate enthusiasm among the
inmates for the courses that it runs. This is because of not just the
low motivation of the staff and the inmates but also because of
poor course selection and the inadequate linkages with the
employers and the buyers".[^/103]

In 2007, a scholar writing up the findings of his study on
leprosy-affected persons in India said of "rehabilitation"[^/104] "that
state and NGO-sponsored microeconomic enterprises and other
income generation schemes, despite some notable exceptions, are
often ill-matched to the needs that they are set up to serve". Skills
imparted in making soap, phenyl, pickles and in cigar rolling
were difficult to sell both because of the fear generated by leprosy
and because there are already multinationals in the area selling
at competitive rates. And, while "begging ... has been identified
as a social problem to be tackled; a disturbance both to the local
population and to India's image on a global stage. ...",[^/105] to his
informants, "begging provided a major income stream and, with
it, a route to dignity".[^/106]

Again in 2007, the joint director (administration) of the department
of social welfare, in her status report filed in the court, set
out handloom/weaving, printing, drawing, cycle repair, bookbinding,
adult education and cutting and tailoring as "facilities
available" in homes where male beggars are lodged (including
the "homes for male beggars (diseased)" and the "home for old
and infirm beggars"), and cutting and tailoring as the vocational
possibility for female beggars.[^/107] In addition, and with the
court's gaze on it, the department of social welfare "undertook"
to "start new vocational trades for the rehabilitation of beggars".

It would, then, seem that neither round up and detention, nor
a stint in certified institutions, is likely to alter the state of
destitution which drives many to public places that the privileged
frequent, to seek alms or to hawk or to offer their services or
otherwise. It would also appear that the law has been structured
not to ensure that the state perform its obligations in relation to
those who reach, or reside in, a state of poverty. It is, instead,
about enabling control over the publicly poor where they may be
viewed as a nuisance, a threat, an inconvenience, a blot on the
landscape or an administrative embarrassment. The perception
of poverty as a motive, in itself, for crime lies within the inner
reaches of the law. It is not what they do, but that they are that is
offensive. In this, the fault of poverty lies with the poor, and gets
constituted into an offence.

This reading of the law can explain how a "leper in a blue
_lungi_" may be projected as the provocation for the reaction, and
all those around get picked up, detained and tagged (if the biometric
identification proposal goes through) while he remains a
vanished presence. The inability to follow through on the individual
complaint by disengaging the relevance of the individual
complaint from the general act of "activating the law" is possible
only because the word of the law and its practice renders its subject
both rightless and voiceless. The experience is revealing
about the complete irrelevance of the individual to this law.
Rounding up and raids are mere manifestations of this disappearance
of the individual.

# Within the Institution

There is, unfortunately, more. For, once within the institution,
the ring closes in on the detained. The rules are such as apply in
coercive custodial institutions. So, to take one instance,[^/108]
persons detained in certified institutions "shall not"

- Refuse to receive any training or to _do work allotted to him_;
- Misbehave or quarrel with any other inmate;
answer untruthfully or refuse to give a "true account of his
movements";
- Cause any disturbance or violence or _omit to assist in suppressing
any disturbance_;
- Do any act or use any language calculated to hurt or offend the
feelings and prejudices of a fellow inmate;
- Disobey any order regulating the cleanliness of his person,
clothing, or bedding, utensils or other articles;
- Refuse, without reasonable excuse, to eat the food prescribed or
wilfully destroy any food or render it unpalatable or unwholesome
(all emphasis added).

And so on. The superintendent is the proximate judge of what
disciplinary breach has occurred, and the imposition of punishment
which may range from formal warning, to forfeiture of
privileges "if any", to confinement in the lock-up for not longer
than three days, to handcuffing (but not in the case of a woman),
to "solitary confinement not exceeding 10 days at a time"[^/109] The
supervisory authority vests in the visiting committee which, as
was seen, may not exist or, if it does, may not meet. The idea of
control over those in poverty, aided by the power to punish by,
and in, detention, is explicit.

The rule making power has, of course, not been asserted to
recognise rights in persons detained in these institutions. There
is no rule regarding the right to receive training or education.
There is no power in the person to resist violence. There is no
guarantee that it is wholesome food or clean water that is
provided in the institution. And, with visiting committees only
found in the provisions of formal law, there is no appeal or extramural
oversight. Into this melee, add a dispirited administrative
workforce,[^/110] and there, it may be, is a recipe for a routine of
intramural death and institutionalised violence.

Eight persons in detention died in the Lampur Beggars Home
between May 13, 2000 and the end of the month. An inquiry
conducted by the sub-divisional magistrate (SDM), Narela, found
that 114 inmates of the home had suffered from gastroenteritis.
"It is apparent from the fact-finding report of the SDM", the high
court observed in a public interest case initiated before it, "that
there was faecal contamination in the water. The report also
pointed out that eight deaths took place. The reason given as the
cause of death by the authorities was 'cardio-respiratory failure.
This does not seem to be correct."[^/111]

# Informal Conditions

In the meantime, an interim report had been filed in court by a
committee constituted by the court to investigate the conditions
prevailing in the beggars' homes in Delhi and what it described
was, indeed, "infernal", in the language of the court. "The home
lacks pipeline for drinking water; most of the time electricity supply
is not available; sanitary conditions are appalling; home is not
connected to sewer line; toilets are choked and emanating bad
odour ... unhygienic conditions are prevailing everywhere ..."[^/112]

The frequency of deaths in beggars' homes was cause for
comment in 1990 too. The "death register" maintained in the
Beggars' Home for Males in Chembur had recorded 19 deaths
between April 1, 1990 and September 20, 1990. In the Female
Beggars' Home, the record read; 55 in 1987--88, 94 in 1988--89, 20
in 1989--90, and four in 1990--91.

The two commissioners who gathered the figures offered this
in explanation: "Since most of the inmates come in a very emaciated
condition and are suffering from one or the other disease,
they succumb to death easily". The medical officer "had informed
the members of the commission that more than due care is taken
in the hospital ward whenever they are admitted".[^/113] If this statement
were to be credited, the death of such numbers after they
have entered the custody of the institution should still raise uneasy
questions. The legitimacy of the law deserves to be tested on this
experience too, where those in such proximity to death because
of their poverty are prescribed punishments for their poverty.

The "register of deaths", the "escape register", the "indefinite
detention register", the register documenting release from the institution,
the register recording punishments for breach of discipline
--- each carry evidence of what the institution means to those
sent into it. The "escape register" in the female beggars' home recorded 48
women as having "escaped" between 1985 and 1991, 33
from the institution, one person from the hospital and "there is
no mention regarding 14 cases". Between April 1, 1990 and September
1, 1990, 29 persons escaped from the male beggars' home.
The "leave of absence" register in the female beggars' home
showed 48 women as having been given leave of absence between 1985
and 1991, during which period 1,386 women had
passed through detention. "Leave of absence is a provision", the
commission remarked, "... (which) is made with a view to help
inmates to go to their homes or relatives whenever there is a
need. It also helps in reconciliation and giving a trial for their
rehabilitation."[^/114] But it had lain underutilised.

The "indefinite detention register" in the female beggars' home
had 14 women named in it. "There are persons from 1962 onwards
which shows that they are there for at least 30 years".[^/115]

Besides, there were discrepancies in recording the age --- where
the probation officer thought a person picked up under the law
was 62 at the time of remand, the medical officer recorded the
age of 85 in the admission register;[^/116] persons were recorded as
released even before the date that they were allegedly arrested,[^/117]
orders were found to have been received long after the period of
detention was over --- even, in one recorded instance, "the office
has not been able to obtain orders of two inmates whose period
was over in 1980. This means these two inmates have been
detained illegally for the last 10 years."[^/118] The list is endless.

That, over the years, if anything has changed, it is as a descent
into the irremediable stands proven. In 2001, the Delhi High
Court was saying:

>According to the (interim) report, in some of the homes located in the
complex as soon as beggars are remanded to the homes, they are
administered beatings by the caretakers to break and subjugate their
will. The committee also found that ferocious dogs which have been
kept by the caretakers have bitten a number of inmates ... [^/119]

In response, the court directed the "immediate removal of the
dogs from the complex. We also direct that no inmate should be
subjected to beatings and should be treated with dignity which is
his fundamental right under Article 21 of the Constitution."[^/120]

Badgaiyan's inquiry, and report of March 2001, followed up on
the issues raised in the interim report that had been presented to
the Delhi High Court. Since January 2001, when some of the staff
were transferred following the order of the high court, he was
told by the "hundreds of inmates" who he interviewed, that
beatings, and "stray dogs", had ceased. Prior to that, almost
everybody complained that "beatings were common but not
quite torturous. They were mostly by hands and occasionally by
sticks, less than a dozen times in the whole year, according to
one who was himself beaten with sticks."[^/121] "The staff", Badgaiyan
said, "pretty much admitted the fact of beatings". To them,
"an atmosphere of fear" was necessary to avoid "serious indiscipline".
In 1986, they said, inmates had beaten up a caretaker
during an escape attempt. The "beatings", Badgaiyan observed,
"have stopped now but can easily return once the pressure
caused by the high court intervention, and the subsequent
transfer of the three caretakers, have eased."[^/122] "Unless", he
added, "something is done to address the causes that underlie
those beatings".[^/123]

It is intriguing, and not a little disturbing, that six-years later, a
report on "The Beggars in Delhi" instituted by the department of
social welfare as a fallout of the case before the Delhi High Court,
and conducted by the department of social welfare, University of
Delhi, only met the street beggars, on the street, and asked them
questions that included "do you know that the government has
established beggars' homes where the beggar can stay and are
provided vocational training?"[^/124] There was no follow-up on
Badgaiyan's caution. Maybe the study was influenced by what
was presumed to have prompted the study. The reasons as
mentioned in the study:

>The menace of beggary in the NCTD has been of concern to all
especially in view of the forthcoming Commonwealth Games in 2010.
Hence the Department of Social Welfare, Government of National
Territory of Delhi decided to get a survey of beggars conducted with a
view to know the exact profile of the beggars so that planning for
their rehabilitation could be done accordingly. _Also beggary prevention
plans could be formulated_.[^/125]

# Conclusions

The logic of the law relating to beggary would be elusive unless
the route to understanding it meanders through the perception of
the poor as potential criminals rendered so by their poverty; as
irritants to the forces of law and urban order; as nuisances to
those to whom they appeal for alms. Ostensible poverty has the
added charmlessness of denting the image of a world class city
and a globalising economy. The showcasing of the city demands
clean-up operations, and the power to effect these. When Mike
Davis writes, "In the urban third world, poor people dread highprofile
international events --- conferences, dignitary visits,
sporting events, beauty contests, and international festivals ---
that prompt authorities to launch crusades to clean up the city",[^/126]
he is merely expressing a sentiment that has acquired the status
of an axiom.

The law relating to beggary is unabashedly clear that it is
intended to provide control over all those who are publicly poor.
The point is the "prevention of begging", and, to this end, is
enacted the power to label, to detain, and to sentence to long
years in coerced custody. The law, including the rules made
under the law, does not expend word or intent on the autonomy,
volition, citizenship rights, or dignity of those in its net. Unsurprisingly,
it provides neither incentive nor sanction to those who
have the obligation to identify, and deal with, the causes of
destitution. Neither the possibility of employment nor the
impossibility foisted on the destitute by unemployability are
required to be the responsibility of the state and its agencies. The
continuum, where it exists, which leads, say, from mass displacement
to destitution, or disability to destitution, or drought to
destitution is not acknowledged. In its preoccupation with the
ostensibly poor as a class, an aspect that suggests, and encourages,
raids and rounding up as legitimate exercises, and the
individual circumstance to be subsumed in the generality of
conditions of poverty.

The practices that the law has fostered are directly attributable
to the powerlessness of the poor, as also the otherwise rightless
who are, or bear a likeness to, the destitute. The pervasiveness of
abuse and extortion, the casual disregard of individual circumstance,
even the easy acceptance of the death of the destitute, is a
symptom, and a consequence, of the way the law constructs the
ostensibly poor as status offenders. There has been the occasional
genuflection to activist opinion: as was a 2002 regulation of the
Delhi Traffic Police which charged motorists with giving alms to
beggars or buying goods from vendors at traffic intersections on
pain of penalty; this avowedly shifted the sanction from the
beggar or vendor to the alms giver, adopting the understanding
that the poor should not be punished for expressing their need.
Yet, when this was overtaken in 2007 by a circumstance created
by the lawyer's demand that all "beggars" be rounded up and
carted away, there was not even a whisper that the rationale of
penalty and sanction had shifted in 2002.

Where criminality has been rife it has been within the certified
institution, and it has been documented, often at the instance of
the court. These are, then, matters of public record. It is not only
the absence of rehabilitation in these institutions which casts a
cloud on the logic of the institution; it is, too, the practice of
abuse, violence and exploitation within the walls. It is criminal
neglect resulting in death and disease. Neither law nor practice
conforms to the Constitution or to any known parameters of
acceptable conduct. This, it would be fair to expect, ought to have
had the consequence of repeal of the law, and disbanding the
institutional structures within which abuse is hidden, and lives
waste away. The only consequence, it seems, has been transfer of
some officials, some years ago.

"In the face of a general economic maladjustment, little good
can be done to beggars by merely passing deterrent and punitive
legislation", Gore said, nearly four decades ago. Indeed, the
attempt made by a member of the Uttar Pradesh Vidhan Parishad
to get a bill drafted on the lines of state laws that punish the poor
failed, because it was argued by the minister of social welfare
that "it would be unjust to ban beggary if society could not
provide jobs to everyone".[^/127]

In 1956, Caleb Foote published an article on "Vagrancy-type
law and its administration" which is a chilling reporting and
analysis of the practice, and letter, of vagrancy laws in Pennsylvania.[^/128]
The casual dispensation of the law, disregard of process,
summary procedure as adequate for the vagrant, the pride of
place occupied by prejudice, the catch-all role of the vagrancy
law "as the garbage pail of criminal law", "dressing up the city
centre", "abating nuisances" --- each, and together, resonate in the
experiences that have accumulated in the Indian system. The
policy objectives that Foote identifies as determining the existence
and practice of vagrancy laws might have been written for
contemporary India. "The acts which are made punishable are
petty in terms of social dangerousness", he wrote, "but the chief
significance of this branch of the criminal law lies in its qualitative
impact and administrative usefulness".[^/129]

There have been at least three occasions when the judiciary
has recognised the constitutional imperfections and impossibilities
of the law relating to beggary, and in its practice. Unemployability,
either as a consequence of state policy or as ignored by it,
is an economic and social phenomenon that makes impoverishment
and poverty assume hyperbolic proportions.[^/130] The history
of vagrancy laws testifies to their repressive potential and
impact. Even as this is written, it is reported that the government
of Delhi has decided to use biometric identification to
track those drawn into the system under the laws relating to
beggary, and this at a mere suggestion from the court, and
without testing the logic, or the invasions of constitutional
rights, implied in its adoption.

Beggary laws have begun to demonstrate how the law may be
made, continued, expanded and practised when the constituency
affected by the laws are powerless --- so rendered by the illegality
that the law visits on them, the prejudice that poverty provokes,
the distance between privilege and poverty, and the vanishing
obligations of the state. Appraising the law, and the practices
that have developed in its shadow, will reveal the patterns of
impunity, callousness and despair that now constitute this law.
This is a law whose logic is long deceased, if such ever existed.
Yet, it persists on the law books, despite mounting evidence of
abuse and malpractice and the incapacity that the law has demonstrated
for doing any good. It is, by any reckoning, a ruthless
assertion of untrammelled power over classes of people who
do not possess the capacity to resist, who have been rendered
choiceless, and whom prejudice and callousness have consigned
to the margins of human existence and beyond the bounds
of citizenship.

\ 

And there the case rests.


[^/1]: S Muralidhar, _Law, Poverty and Legal Aid: Access
to Criminal Justice_, pp. 260 _et seq._, 2004; B B Pande,
Vagrants, Beggars and Status Offenders in Law and
Poverty: Critical Essays, p. 248 at pp. 251 _et seq._
(Upendra Baxi (ed) 1988) (hereafter Pande).

[^/2]: e.g., Section 18 of the Lepers Act 1898: "_Protection
to persons acting bona fide under Act_ --- No suit,
prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against any officer or person in respect of
anything in good faith done or intended to be
done under, or in pursuance of, the provisions of
this Act."

[^/3]: BPBA 1959, Section 2(1).

[^/4]: _Ibid_., Section 9.

[^/5]: _Ibid_., Section 11.

[^/6]: _Ibid_., Section 2(1)(a).

[^/7]: _Ibid_., Section 2(1)(b).

[^/8]: _Ibid_., Section 2(1)(c).

[^/9]: _Ibid_., Section 2(1)(d).

[^/10]: Pande, _supra_ n 1, at p. 271.

[^/11]: _Ibid_.

[^/12]: _Manjula Sen vs State of Maharashtra_, Writ Petition
No 1639 of 1990, in the High Court of Bombay, p. 3,
in Report of the Commission on Beggars Act,
Annexure No 1 (SD Gokhale, chairman, Bombay,
1990).

[^/13]: Gyanendra Dhar Badgaiyan, Beggar Institutions
--- Lampur, Narela: An Assessment, pp. 2--3 (Government
of NCT of Delhi, March 2001).

[^/14]: _Report on the Procedure Followed in Arrest of
Beggars under the BPBA 1959_, p. 6, in Report of the
Commission on Beggars Act, Annexure No 4
(SD Gokhale, Chairman, Bombay, 1990).

[^/15]: Pande, _supra_ n i at p. 271.

[^/16]: Report of the Commission on Beggars Act, _supra_
n 13, Annexure No 4, at p. 5.

[^/17]: _New Delhi Bar Association vs Commissioner of
Police, New Delhi_ (sometimes written as _Court
on its own Motion vs Commissioner of Police,
New Delhi_), criminal complaint in the court of
Kamini Lau, ACMM, New Delhi, March 24, 2006,
p. 4, appended as Annexure A to the Letter of
Referral No 324, ACMM/ND to High Court of
Delhi, by Kamini Lau, ACMM, New Delhi,
August 3, 2006.

[^/18]: _Ibid_., at 4/7.

[^/19]: _Ibid_., at 7/10 (emphasis added).

[^/20]: Letter of Referral No 324 ACMM/ND to High
Court of Delhi, by Kamini Lau, ACMM, New Delhi
August 3, 2006.

[^/21]: _Ibid_.

[^/22]: A reference to a crime reported in 'Woman,
Daughter Murdered in Flat' in The Hindu dated
March 13, 2006. On April 25,
a report titled "Siddharth Enclave Double Murder
Solved" appeared in the same newspaper, which indicated that a
domestic handyman and his friends had been
picked up by the police, adding to the mystery of
why the crime was mentioned in this context of
beggary.

[^/23]: Status Report on Behalf of the Department of
Social Welfare, Government of NCT of Delhi,
November 20, 2006, in the matter of _Court on Its
Own Motion vs Commissioner of Police and Ors_,
Writ Petition (Criminal) No 1840/2006, in the
high court of Delhi, pp. 68--72, at p. 70 (These are
upper class neighbourhoods in the city).

[^/24]: _Ibid_., at p. 71.

[^/25]: _Ibid_., at p. 71.

[^/26]: _Ibid_., at p. 70.

[^/27]: Status Report by Deputy Commissioner of Police
(South) February 2, 2007, in the matter of _Court
on Its Own Motion vs Commissioner of Police and
Ors_, Writ Petition (Criminal) No 1840/2006, in
the high court of Delhi, pp. 74--75, at p. 74.

[^/28]: Status Report on Behalf of the Department of
Social Welfare, Government of NCT of Delhi,
February 2, 2007, in the matter of _Court on Its
Own Motion vs Commissioner of Police and Ors_,
Writ Petition (Criminal) No 1840/2006, in the
High Court of Delhi, pp. 80--81, at p. 81.

[^/29]: Status Report of the Deputy Commissioner of
Police (head quarters), October 13, 2006, in the
matter of the _New Delhi Bar Association vs
Commissioner of Police_, Writ Petition (Criminal)
No 1840/2006, pp. 63--67, at p. 65.

[^/30]: Status Report by Deputy Commissioner of Police
(south), _supra_ n 27, at 74.

[^/31]: Application under Section 482 CrPC in the matter
of _Court on Its Own Motion vs In re: Begging in
Public_, Crl MA No 11314/2006 in WP (Criminal)
No 1840/2006, pp. 50--59, at p. 53.

[^/32]: Status report by deputy commissioner of police
(head quarters), _supra_ no 29, pp. 63--67 at p. 66.

[^/33]: Counsel appointed by the court to assist it in
dealing with the matter.

[^/34]: This could happen, according to the Amicus Curiae,
by invoking Section 5(5), of the BPBA 1959.

[^/35]: Order of Delhi High Court, July 30, 2007 in _The
Court on Its Own Motion vs In re: Begging in Public_,
W P (Criminal) No 1840/2006.

[^/36]: Criminal Revision Petition No 784 of 2006
decided on December 5, 2006 (single judge).

[^/37]: Delhi Prevention of Begging Rules 1960, Rule 32,
read with BPBA 1959, Section 5(1).

[^/38]: 617 NYS 2d 429 cited in the _Ram Lakhan vs State_,
_supra_ no 36, para 10.

[^/39]: _Ibid_.

[^/40]: _Ram Lakhan vs State_, _supra_ no 36, at para 5.

[^/41]: _Ibid_., at para 6.

[^/42]: _Ibid_.

[^/43]: _Ibid_.

[^/44]: _Ibid_.

[^/45]: _Ibid_.

[^/46]: _Ibid_.

[^/47]: _Ibid_.

[^/48]: _Ibid_.

[^/49]: _Ibid_.

[^/50]: _Ibid_.

[^/51]: _Ibid_. (emphasis added).

[^/52]: MS Gore _et al._, 'The Beggar Problem in Metropolitan
Delhi (1959)', extracted in _Law and Poverty:
Cases and Materials_, p. 267 (L M Singhvi (ed) 1973)
(hereafter "Gore") at p. 269.

[^/53]: _Ram Lakhan vs State_, _supra_ no 36, at paras 6--7; In
this, the judge took assistance from the development
of the doctrine in _Hibbert vs The Queen_
(1955), 2 SCR 973 at 1012 (Canadian Supreme
Court), _R vs Howe_ 1987 AC 417 at 429 (English
Court of Appeals) and the majority judgment of
the Supreme Court of Canada in _Perka vs The
Queen_ (1984), 2 SCR 232.

[^/54]: The BPBA Act, under Section 5(6), required the
court to take into account _inter alia_, "the circumstances
and conditions in which the beggar was
living", before passing an order under the Act.
The judge has read this to include the person's
'helplessness, poverty and duress': _Ram Lakhan vs
State_, _supra_ no 36, at para 8.

[^/55]: _Ram Lakhan vs State_, _supra_ no 36, at para 9.

[^/56]: _Ibid_.

[^/57]: See _Ram Lakhan vs State_, _supra_ no 36, at para 1o.

[^/58]: _Ibid_.

[^/59]: _Ibid_., para 11.

[^/60]: _Ibid_., at para 4.

[^/61]: _Ibid_.

[^/62]: _Ibid_., at para 14.

[^/63]: _Ibid_.

[^/64]: _Ibid_., at para 10.

[^/65]: _Manjula Sen vs Superintendent, Beggars Home_,
Bombay High Court (Ordinary Original Civil
Jurisdiction), WP No 1639/1990, in Report of the
Commission on Beggars Act, _supra_ no 12,
Annexure No 2.

[^/66]: _Ibid_., Annexure 2, at p. 4, clause 25.

[^/67]: _Ibid_.

[^/68]: Report of the Commission on Beggars Act, _supra_
no 12, Recommendations (Chapter VI), pp. 28--29.

[^/69]: S P Sathe, _The Bombay Prevention of Begging Act,
1959: Opinion Regarding Constitutional Validity_
in report of the Commission on Beggars Act, _supra_
no 12, Annexure No 5(A), at p. 5.

[^/70]: _Ibid_.

[^/71]: _Ibid_., p. 6.

[^/72]: Report of the Commission on Beggars Act, _supra_
no 12, Recommendations (Chapter VI), p. 29.

[^/73]: _Ibid_.

[^/74]: _Ibid_.

[^/75]: _Ibid_., at p. 31.

[^/76]: Report of the Procedure Followed in Arrest of
Beggars under Bombay Prevention of Begging
Act, in Report of the Commission on Beggars Act,
_supra_ no 12, Annexure 4, p. 5.

[^/77]: _Ibid_., p. 5.

[^/78]: Report of the Commission on Beggars Act, _supra_
no 12, Recommendations (Chapter VI), p. 31.

[^/79]: _Ibid_., at p. 31.

[^/80]: Inspection Report on Beggars' Home for Males,
Chembur in report of the Commission on Beggars
Act, _supra_ no 12, Annexure 3, at p. 15.

[^/81]: _Ibid_., at p. 13.

[^/82]: Inspection Report of Beggars' Home for Females
of Chembur, in Report of the Commission on
Beggars Act, _supra_ no 12, Annexure 3, at p. 34.

[^/83]: Report of the Commission on Beggars Act, _supra_
no 12, Recommendations (Chapter VI), at p. 34.

[^/84]: _Ibid_.

[^/85]: In fact, there is evidence that the prescriptions in
the law are being replicated in other state legislations.
See, for e.g., the Kerala Prevention of
Begging Bill 2006 found at [http://www.kerala.gov.in/begging_ban.pdf](http://www.kerala.gov.in/begging_ban.pdf)

[^/86]: BPBA 1959, Section 4(1).

[^/87]: _Ibid_., Section 5(1).

[^/88]: _Ibid_., Section 5(4).

[^/89]: _Ibid_., Section 5(5)(a).

[^/90]: _Ibid_., Section 5(5)(c).

[^/91]: _Ibid_., Section 5(5)(b).

[^/92]: _Ibid_., Section 6(2).

[^/93]: _Ibid_., Section 6(3).

[^/94]: _Ibid_., Section 9(1).

[^/95]: _Ibid_., Section 9(1) Proviso.

[^/96]: _Ibid_., Section 29(1).

[^/97]: _Ibid_., Section 29(2).

[^/98]: _Court on Its Own Motion vs In re: Begging in
Public_, _supra_ no 31, Delhi High Court order dated
February 2, 2007.

[^/99]: _Ibid_., Order dated February 8, 2007, p. 3.

[^/100]: _The Hindu_, December 5, 2007.

[^/101]: Gore, _supra_ no 52, at p. 270.

[^/102]: Report on the Working of the Beggars Home and
Implementation of the Prevention of Begging Act
(1959) and Rules, p. 12 (College of Social Work,
Bombay 1999), in Report of the Commission on
Beggars Act, _supra_ no 12, Annexure 6.

[^/103]: Badgaiyan, Beggar Institutions --- Lampur, Narela,
an Assessment, _supra_ no 13, at p. 12.

[^/104]: James Staples, "Leprosy and the State", 2007 _EPW_
437 at 442. It is his idea to place the term "rehabilitation"
within inverted commas.

[^/105]: _Ibid_. at 442, citing M Chaudhary (2000), 'India's
Image as a Tourist Destination: A Perspective of
Foreign Tourists' in _Tourism Management_ 21, 3,
Kurukshetra University, pp. 293--97.

[^/106]: Staples, _supra_ no 104, at p. 442.

[^/107]: Compliance Report on Behalf of Department of
Social Welfare, Government of NCT of Delhi,
Annexure "R-V" in compliance with High Court's
direction dated February 8, 2007, filed on
or before March 15, 2007, in _Court on Its Own
Motion vs Commissioner of Police_, _supra_ no 27, at
pp. 89 _et seq._

[^/108]: The Delhi Prevention of Begging Rules, 1960,
Rule 15 (hereafter, DPBR).

[^/109]: _Ibid_., Rule 29.

[^/110]: Report of the Four One-day Workshops Organised
for Caretaking Staff of Residential Institutions,
p. 13 (Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Department
of Criminology and Correctional Administration,
1990), in report of the Commission on
Beggars Act, _supra_ no 12, Annexure 6; _See also_,
Badgaiyan, Beggar Institutions --- Lampur, Narela:
An Assessment, _supra_ no 13, at pp. 8--9: "These all
important caretakers are class IV employees lying
right at the bottom of the entire bureaucratic
heap. Their salaries are dismal and as a class they
enjoy very little respect in the establishment.
There are no rewards for good performance ...
And the resounding message ... is that their job is
mainly about keeping inmates under control and
that coercion is an acceptable means of doing so".

[^/111]: _M S Pattar vs Government of NCT of Delhi_ W P
(Civil) No 3118 of 2000, order dated January 10,
2001, p. 2.

[^/112]: Cited in _ibid_., order dated January 10, 2001, at p i
(Anil Dev Singh & OP Dwivedi J J).

[^/113]: Inspection Report of Beggars Home for Females
of Chembur, Bombay, _supra_ no 82, at p. 29.

[^/114]: _Ibid_., at p. 28.

[^/115]: _Ibid_., at p. 31.

[^/116]: And the "mistakes" were numerous: see, 'Inspection
Report on Beggars Home for Males', Chembur,
_supra_ n 80, at p. 12.

[^/117]: _Ibid_., at p. 12.

[^/118]: 'Inspection Report of Beggars Home for Females
of Chembur', Bombay, _supra_ no 82, at p. 32.

[^/119]: _M S Pattar vs Government of NCT of Delhi_, _supra_
no 111, order dated January 10, 2001, at p. 2.

[^/120]: _Ibid_., order dated January 10, 2001, at p. 3.

[^/121]: Badgaiyan, Beggar Institutions --- Lampur, Narela:
An Assessment, _supra_ no 13, at p. 7.

[^/122]: _Ibid_., at p. 8.

[^/123]: _Ibid_., at p. 8.

[^/124]: Snehlata Tandon, Report on the Survey of the
Beggars in Delhi, p. 34 (Department of Social
Work, University of Delhi, 2007).

[^/125]: _Ibid_., at p. 12.

[^/126]: Mike Davis, _Planet of Slums_.

[^/127]: Gore, _supra_ no 52, at p. 269.

[^/128]: Caleb Foote, 'Vagrancy-Type Law and Its Administration'
in William Chambliss, _Crime and the
Legal Process_, 1969.

[^/129]: _Ibid_., at p. 303.

[^/130]: A 2007 report by one of India's largest staffing
companies assesses, for instance, that in "the
working age group of 15--60, almost 40% is not
literate". "Only 7% of the population in the 15--29
age group has received some form of vocational
training": See, Teamlease Services, _India Labour
Report 2007_ reported in "Unemployability: Bigger
Crisis in India" dated November 16, 2007 found at
[http://www.rediff.com/money/2007/nov/16labour.htm](http://www.rediff.com/money/2007/nov/16labour.htm) visited on December 10, 2007.
