_Despite the Union Carbide
Corporation being criminally
liable for the Bhopal catastrophe,
the government, though being the
sole representative of the victims,
colluded with the UCC and
compromised the interests of the
affected people. The UCC and its
Indian subsidiary, the Union of
India and the state of Madhya
Pradesh made sure that the
victims would not obtain
compensation comparable to the
damages awarded in similar mass
tort actions in the United States.
Moreover, even with the
re-institution of criminal liability,
the UCC accused have been
allowed to evade prosecution.
The trial court in Bhopal had no
option but to hand down a
sentence, equivalent to what is
given for causing death by
negligence in a traffic accident!
Bhopal has hastened the decline
in the standards of judicial
decisions on the environment
more than any other case._

\ 

The paltry payments made to the
victims, the escape of the chairman
of the Union Carbide Corporation
(UCC), Warren Anderson on a government
plane, the neglect of the babies born
subsequently with terrible deformities
and ailments, the inability of the state to
clean the contaminated soil, the petty
sentences rendered and the 26 long years
in the Trial Court, all seem separate instances
which, though regrettable, are
treated as issues of governance and not
one of politics, conspiracy and betrayal.
Let us not look at the past, we are advised,
let us look to the future to ensure that such
an incident does not take place again. But
unless we understand the treachery of
the past, it is impossible to change things
for the future.

Indira Gandhi's death and the appointment
of Rajiv Gandhi as Prime Minister of
India marked the end of the era of the
Indian version of social democracy started
by Jawaharlal Nehru and the beginning of
American-style globalisation. Rajiv Gandhi
started off well with Ronald Reagan, the
then President of United States. It is said
that the understanding between these
two leaders ultimately led to the pitiable
settlement being agreed to by India, the
quashing of all criminal liability and the
removal of Anderson from Indian soil.
Arjun Singh, naturally, will be made the
scapegoat as if decisions of this magnitude
could be taken without the prime
minister's approval.

In the power play of globalised politics,
all this is understandable, though it may
make us angry. But the inability of the
Supreme Court of India to stand firm and
side with the people of India against UCC
and the government of the United States
of America (USA) left many Indians confused
and frustrated. The long line of
decisions starting from 1989 ultimately
left them bitter.

It was in the interests of the victims to
have the cases tried in the US where substantial
damage would have been awarded.
In the Exxon Valdez oil spill case,
where no one died, $507 million was
awarded. In the Vioxx drug case, where
47,000 consumers suffered heart attacks,
strokes or death, $4.85 billion was paid on
an average of $103,000 per plaintiff. In asbestos
litigation, jury verdicts range anywhere
from $1 million to $20 million in
compensation per person. In the Lockerbie
bombing case, Libya paid $2.7 billion
or $10 million per family.

Legal luminaries flocking to represent
Dow Chemical was understandable, Nani
Palkhivala made a strenuous attempt by
filing affidavits in the US courts to have
the litigation brought to India. The then
Attorney General, Soli Sorabjee, argued
against giving the victims a hearing and
justified the quashing of criminal proceedings.
What was inexplicable was the
attitude of the judiciary. In February 1989,
in a cryptic three-page order containing
no reasons, the Supreme Court accepted
the settlement of $470 million as "just,
equitable and reasonable" and quashed all
criminal proceedings. In May, reasons
were given as an afterthought. Chief
Justice R S Pathak then resigned on being
nominated by India to the World Court at
The Hague. After indignant protests in the
country, in 1991, the Supreme Court
reinstated the criminal proceedings. In
1996, in a decision likely to have far-reaching
consequences, the Supreme
Court quashed the charges of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder and
voluntarily causing grievous hurt and
introduced the criminal negligence charge
carrying a maximum sentence of two
years. The hands of the Trial Court were
tied. It is now up to the present Chief Justice
of India to right this historic wrong.

# Background

On the night of 2 December 1984, there
was a massive leak of methyl isocyanate
(MIC), a highly toxic gas which resulted in
the death of 20,000 persons and disablement
of more than 2,00,000 persons.[^/1] The
gas affected not only those living but even
the generations that came thereafter. As a
result of a high-level conspiracy between
UCC, the US government, the Union Government
of India and government of the State
of Madhya Pradesh, Warren Anderson was
secretively taken away from Bhopal on a
government plane and allowed to leave
the country.

Thereafter, 3,500 cases were filed by
victims claiming damages of a total of
$150 billion. These claims were made on
the pleading that the UCC Corporate Policy
Manual, testimonies available and documents
gathered demonstrated "pervasive
decision-making presence of UCC in all
vital matters relating to the location of
the plant, the designing of the plant, the
production and storage of ultra hazardous
substances, toxic chemicals and gases, the
designing of safety systems and the monitoring
of accidents review of the operational
safety systems".[^/2]

Later, Morehouse and Subramanian did
a sophisticated analysis of compensation
and rehabilitation costs and worked these
out to about $4 billion.[^/3]

# Litigation in America

The Union of India filed a suit on 8 April 1985
in the US District Court (Southern
District of New York) against UCC for compensation
and punitive damages. Earlier,
on 20 February 1985, Parliament enacted
the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Processing
of Claims) Act, 1985 purporting to speedily,
effectively and equitable securing all
claims arising out of the Bhopal gas leak.

UCC then filed a motion to dismiss the
Union of India's suit pursuant to the doctrine
of _forum non conveniens_. In this Nani
Palkhivala filed an affidavit in the American
Court saying that the Indian courts were
competent to effectively handle tort litigation
of this magnitude. Marc Galanter, a
leading US scholar on the Indian legal
system, filed an affidavit to the contrary.
Palkhivala was wrong then and was
proved wrong by subsequent developments
in the Indian courts. Marc Galanter's
stand was vindicated. Palkhivala said
that there was "no doubt that the Indian
judicial system can fairly and satisfactorily
handle the Bhopal litigation".[^/4] "The
charge of inordinate delays" he said, "is
wholly inapt and inapplicable as regards
the Bhopal case".[^/5] He was confident that
"the unprecedented Bhopal case will
receive unprecedented treatment in India".[^/6]
He ended with a demeaning and degrading
observation that the "$9.5 billion
which I believe represents that total aid
given by the US to the Indian Republic
over the last 35 years is exceeded by the
aggregate claims made on behalf of the
Bhopal victims".[^/7]

Marc Galanter argued in his affidavit[^/8]
that India "has only incompletely emerged
from the heritage of colonial rule ... the
Indian system is characterised by massive
backlogs of cases and enormous delays ...
(which) can be considered a permanent
feature of the Indian system ... tort law in
India is undeveloped ... (and of the few tort
cases) none deal with the problems arising
from complex technologies ... the Bar
in India does not presently possess the
pool of skills, the fund of experience or
the organisational capacity to effectively
and efficiently pursue massive and complex
litigation ... and the Indian legal system
contains a paucity of devices to promote
timely resolution of complex cases."

On 12 May 1986 federal Judge John F
Keenan allowed the application of UCC but
imposed three conditions.

(1) That UCC shall consent to the jurisdiction
of the courts of India and shall continue
to waive defences based on the statute
of limitation;
(2) That UCC shall agree to satisfy any
judgment rendered by an Indian Court
against it and if applicable, upheld on
appeal, provided the judgment and affirmance
"comport with minimal requirements
of due process"; and
(3) That UCC shall be subject to discovery
under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
of the US after appropriate demand by
the plaintiffs.

UCC filed an appeal before the US Court
of Appeal for the Second Circuit, and the
Appellate Court set aside the second and
third condition.

# In the Bhopal District Court

In the meanwhile, on 5 September 1986,
Union of India filed a suit for damages in
the District Court of Bhopal being regular
suit no 1113 of 1986. In that suit, UCC gave
an undertaking to preserve and maintain
unencumbered assets to the extent of
$3 billion. Pursuant to this undertaking,
the district court lifted the injunction
against UCC's selling assets. This perhaps
was a mistake we will come to regret. On 17 December 1987, the district court
ordered interim relief of Rs 350 crore. This
was reduced by the high court on 4 April 1988 to 250 crore.

In the meanwhile a charge sheet was
filed under Sections 304, 324, 326,429 read
with (r/w) Section 35 of the Indian Penal Code
(IPC) against Warren Anderson and others.

# Supreme Court and the Victims

On 5 February 1989, in a cryptic three-page
order containing no reasons at all, a
constitutional bench of the Supreme Court
of India, headed by the then Chief Justice
RS Pathak quashed "all criminal proceedings
related to and arising out of the
disaster". Without any discussion on the
"mass of data" placed before the Supreme
Court and the extensive pleadings filed by
the parties, the Supreme Court abruptly
closed the case with the observation: "we
are of the opinion that the case is preeminently
fit for an overall settlement between
the parties covering all litigations,
claims, rights and liabilities related to and
arising out of the disaster". The Supreme
Court found the settlement sum of $470
million "just, equitable and reasonable".[^/9]

A couple of months later, the Supreme
Court woke up to the need to provide reasons
for its rather dismal decision. On 4
May 1989, reasons were set out in a separate
decision.[^/10] It was "the compelling
need for urgent relief" which prompted
the Court to make the initial order; UCC,
through Counsel, offered $350 million.
"Shri Nariman stated that his client was of
the view that the amount was the highest
it could be up to". The Attorney General of
India "submitted that any sum less than 500
million US dollars could not be reasonable".
The victims were excluded from
these proceedings. In this casual, perfunctory
manner, the final compensation package
was decided. It may be remembered
that in the Exxon Valdez oil spill case, the
jury awarded $2.5 billion which was later
reduced by the Supreme Court of the US to
$507 million. Moreover, no one died in
this case. Perhaps more comparable is the 2008
Merck & Co Inc case which settled
claims by 47,000 consumers who suffered
heart attacks, strokes, or death from using
the pharmaceutical product Vioxx. The
company agreed to pay $4.85 billion,
representing an average of $103,000
per plaintiff.

An even larger public health disaster in
the US has been the use of asbestos as an
insulation material. Asbestos exposure
has been proven to cause mesothelioma, a
rare and highly deadly form of lung cancer.
In asbestos litigation, jury verdicts
can range anywhere from $1 million to
$20 million in compensation per plaintiff.
However, where a settlement is reached,
these amounts are substantially lower.
Legal analysts have estimated that asbestos
litigation in the US has cost over $250
billion and has involved more than
7,30,000 plaintiffs.

The 1988 bombing of Pan Am Flight
103, or "the Lockerbie bombing", is another
example of a large class action settlement.
In a private agreement reached in
May 2002, Libya committed to pay approximately
$2.7 billion to resolve wrongful
death claims by the families of those
killed, representing $10 million per family.

Sadly, there is no reference in the
Supreme Court order to any international
norm or standard or practice regarding
damages, paid in similar or comparable
circumstances. The calculations done by
the Supreme Court show that it compared
the Bhopal disaster with motor accident
cases. "It is well known", said the Supreme
Court, "that in fatal accident actions
where children are concerned, the compensation
awardable is in conventional
sums ranging from R 15,000 to Rs 30,000
($500 in 1989).

The Court then awarded Rs 2 lakh
($4,000) in each case of death and total
permanent disability and Rs 1 lakh ($2,000)
in each case of permanent partial disablement.
This judgment ends prophetically
with the sentence "those who trust this
Court will not have cause for despair".[^/11]

Apart from the paltry amounts awarded,
the hurtful part of the decision was the
quashing of all criminal cases.

# The Act Upheld as Constitutional

On 22 December 1989 the constitutional
bench of the Supreme Court in _Charanlal
Sahoo vs Union of India_[^/12] looked into
whether the Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster
(Processing of Claims) Act, 1985 and the
Bhopal Gas Leak Disaster (Registering
and Processing of Claims) Scheme, 1985
were constitutionally valid. The Court decided
to look into whether "the act has
been worked in any improper way".[^/13] The
Supreme Court upheld the right of the union
government to be the sole representative
of the victims even to the exclusion of
the victims themselves. Reference was
made to the _parens patriae_ doctrine which
obliges the state to protect its citizens. But
the Court failed to recognise that the
Union of India was, on the contrary, colluding
with UCC and compromising the
interests of the victims. After observing
that "if the victims had been given an opportunity
to be heard, they would, _inter
alia_, have pointed out that the amount
agreed to be paid by UCC was hopelessly
inadequate and that UCC, its officers and
agents ought not to be absolved of criminal
liability, and that the central government
itself was liable to have been sued as
a joint tort-feasor",[^/14] the Supreme Court
inexcusably upheld the exclusion of the
victims, on the specious argument that
"no useful purpose would be served by
giving a post decisional hearing ... having
regard to the fact that there are no further
additional data and facts available with
the victims which can be profitably and
meaningfully presented to controvert the
basis of the settlement."[^/15] This was entirely
incorrect because as revealed subsequently,
there was a gross underestimation
of the number of deaths and injuries
and the lasting nature of the ill effects of
the gas leak on individuals, livestock and
the environment. Therefore, said the
Supreme Court: "though settlement without
notice is not quite proper to do a great
right after all it is permissible sometimes
to do a little wrong".[^/16]

To meet the argument repeatedly made
that the Union of India was a joint tort-feasor
as, inter alia, as its agency and instrumentalities
(the Life Insurance Corporation
and others were shareholders in
Union Carbide of India Ltd - UCIL), and
that the plant was permitted to operate by
the Indian authorities close to a heavily
populated area, the Supreme Court
brushed aside these objections holding
that "the circumstances that financial institutions
held shares in the UCIL would
not disqualify the Government of India
from acting as _parens patriae_".[^/17] The
Supreme Court recognised that "perhaps,
theoretically, it might have been possible
to constitute another independent statutory
body ... entrusted with the task of agitating
or establishing the same claims"[^/18]
The Court observed that "the question
whether there is scope for the Union of
India being responsible or liable as a joint
tortfeasor is a difficult and different question.
But even assuming that it was possible
that the central government might be
liable in a case of this nature, the learned
attorney general was right in contending
that it was only proper that the central
government should be able and authorised
to represent the victims."[^/19]

The then attorney general, Soli Sorabjee,
made a series of unfortunate submissions,
urging "that the allegation that a large
number of victims did not give consent to
the settlement entered into, is really of no
relevance[^/20] ...  Hearing the parties after
the settlements would also not serve any
purpose[^/21] ...  Quashing of criminal proceedings
was done by the Court in exercise
of plenary powers under articles 136
and 142 of the Constitution."[^/22]

On the quantum of damages, though
the Supreme Court recognised "that the
measure of compensation in these kinds of
cases must be correlated to the magnitude
and capacity of the enterprise ... not on the
basis of actual consequences suffered ...
because such compensation must have a
deterrent effect",[^/23] nevertheless the Court
concluded "we are of the opinion that
justice has been done to the victims".[^/24]

The majority decision ended on an
ominous note with the Supreme Court
referring to "the atmosphere that was
created in the country". "Attempts were
made", said the Supreme Court, "to shake
the confidence of the people in the judicial
process and also to undermine the credibility
of this Court. This was unfortunate
... the credibility of the judiciary is as
important as the alleviation of the suffering
of the victims ... we hope these adjudications
will restore that credibility".[^/25]

In a separate concurring decision, justice
K N Singh warned that "if the act was
declared unconstitutional, the settlement
under which the UCC has already deposited
a sum of Rs 750 crore ... would fall and
the amount of money which is already in
deposit with the registry of this Court
would not be available for relief to the
victims."[^/26] This was a patently wrong conclusion.
Even if the settlement was set
aside, it was open to the Supreme Court to
impound the amount deposited by away
of interim payment for the victims. The
whole tenor of this decision suggests an
unwarranted helplessness on the part of
the Supreme Court, firstly, because "it is
difficult to foresee any reasonable possibility
of the acceptance of ... the observations
made by this Court in M C Mehta's
case[^/27] (according to which damages)
would be much more than normal damages
... (and) must be computed on the
basis of the capacity of a delinquent made
liable to pay."[^/28] A second unwarranted
observation was made to the effect that if
the government did not assume monopoly
of the litigation the victims would be helpless
to proceed. "Because of the situation"
said the Supreme Court, "the victims were
under disability in pursuing their claims".
Thus, the tenor of all the Supreme Court
judgments is to the effect that the Government
of India and the judiciary were doing
the victims a favour by acting on their
behalf in the manner in which they did.

The notion that the victims were incapable
on acting on their own was wrong
then, and, with the rich experience of history,
has been proved totally wrong even
today. Many non-governmental organisations
(NGOs) gathered around, collecting
extensive data which the State of Madhya
Pradesh and Union of India refused to
look at. Many lawyers both in India and
America offered their services pro bono to
support the victims. Suits were meticulously
drafted and had they been allowed
to proceed evidence would have been
elaborately led to establish the claims of
the victims against UCC, UCIL, Union of
India and State of Madhya Pradesh. All
that the Supreme Court had to do was to
ensure that the cases proceeded on a fast
track and that all technical impediments
and objections were brushed aside.
Instead of this the State of Madhya
Pradesh, the Union of India, Union Carbide
and the government of US entered
into unholy alliance to undermine and
sabotage the efforts of the victims to obtain
compensation comparable to the
damages awarded in similar mass tort
actions in the US and to have the accused
prosecuted speedily in India. Instead of
seeing through this unholy alliance, the
Supreme Court let down the people of Bhopal
by clearing a settlement that was patently
paltry and by allowing the litigation
in the Trial Court to drag on for 26 years.

Returning to the concurring but separate
decision of justice K N Singh, a pious
sermon on the role of multinational and
transnational corporations follows. "Multi-national
companies in many cases exploited
the underdeveloped nations and in
some cases they influenced political and
economical policies of host countries
which subverted the sovereignty of those
countries. There have been complaints
against the multinationals for adopting
unfair and corrupt means to advance their
interests in the host countries."[^/29] Referring
to the UN Code of Conduct on Transnational
Corporations, justice K N Singh
held that "a transnational corporation
should be made liable and subservient to
laws of our country and the liability
should not be restricted to the affiliate
company only but the parent corporation
should also be made liable for any damage
caused to the human beings or ecology.
The law must require transnational corporations
to agree to pay such damages
as may be determined by the statutory
agencies and forums constituted under it
without exposing the victims to long
drawn litigation".[^/30]

Justices S Ranganathan and A MAhmadi
made a separate decision partly dissenting
regretting that the Supreme Court had put
an end to all litigation without first considering
the issue of validity of the statute.
The court found it "unfortunate"[^/31] that
though the writ petitions impugning the
act were pending before the Supreme
Court these petitions were not decided
and the settlement was approved and all
the litigation closed in the 1989 decisions
of the Supreme Court.

The court then found itself "in somewhat
of a predicament[^/32] as it has to pronounce
on the validity of the provisions of the Act
in the context of the implementation of its
provisions in a particular manner and,
though we cannot express any views regarding
the merits of the settlement, we
are asked to consider whether said settlement
can be consistent with a correct and
proper interpretation of the Act".[^/33]

Then in a startling display of unawareness
of the principles of natural justice,
particularly in the context of mass tort actions,
justices Ranganathan and Ahmadi
compared the situation to a Karta of a
Hindu undivided family. The Union of
India in its _parens patriae_ position _qua_ the
victims was similar to that of a Karta _qua_
the junior members of a family who "are
not to be consulted before entering into
a settlement!"

# Scolding the Victims

The two judges then went on to berate the
victims and their supporters for being
"apparently not alert enough to keep a
watching brief in the Supreme Court".[^/34]
Despite the vehement protests repeatedly
made regarding the paltry amount of the
settlement, which were carried in the
national media, the two judges assert: "no
attempt appears to have been made to put
forward a contention that the amount of
settlement was inadequate"![^/35] Then comes
the most startling statement that "there
was a day's interval between the enunciation
of the terms of the settlement and
their approval by the Court."[^/36] By this the
Court meant that 24 hours after the
disclosure of the terms of the settlement
was adequate for persons to protest and
the approval given by the Court a day
after the disclosure of the settlements
was justified.

All in all, a reading of the majority decisions
and the two minority decisions show
how out of touch the Supreme Court was
with the suffering, grievances and demands
of the victims and how the Court
proceeded quite regardless of the views
expressed on behalf of the victim families.

# Restoring the Criminal Cases

Once again "a hue and cry was raised
against the settlement by victim groups".[^/37]
"Considerable heat was generated throughout
the Court hearing and the press was
also none too kind on this Court".[^/38] A
series of review petitions were filed in the
Supreme Court once again seeking a
"Fairness Hearing", inclusion of additional
victims in the list of persons to be compensated,
higher compensation amounts
and the restoration of the criminal cases.
The Supreme Court noticed the pleadings
to the effect that "the toll of lives has since
gone up to around 4,000 and the health of
tens of thousands has come to be affected
and impaired ... though it was initially
assumed that MIC caused merely simple
and short-term injuries ... it has now been
found by medical research that injury ... is
to the entire system including nephrological
lymphs, immune and circulatory systems
... and has mutagenic effects and that
the injury ... is progressive ... Indeed the
effects of exposure of the human system
to this toxic chemical have not been fully
grasped. Research studies seem to suggest
that exposure to these chemical fumes
renders the human physiology susceptible
to long-term pathology and the toxin is
suspected to lodge itself in the tissues and
cause long-term damage to the vital systems
... The potential risk of long term effects
is presently unpredictable."[^/39] Despite
this the Court concluded that "as of now,
medical documentation discloses that
there is no conclusive evidence to establish
a causal link between cancer incidence
and MIC exposure".[^/40]

The Court then noticed the pleadings in
the review petitions to the effect that UCC,
holding 50.9 shares in UCIL, "retained and
exercised powers of effective control over
its Indian subsidiary in terms of its corporate
policy".[^/41] The plea was that UCC
established and maintained the Bhopal
chemical plant "with defective and inadequate
safety standards which compared
with designs of UCC's American plants,
manifested an indifference and disregard
for human safety".[^/42] Despite this, the Court
warned that the settlement ought to be accepted
as "we should not proceed on the
premise that the liability of UCC has been
firmly established".[^/43] Thus the whole approach
of the Court was pessimistic and diffident.
The Court appeared unsure as to the
liability of the UCC and the connected inability
of UCIL to pay substantial damages.

The positive aspect of this decision was
the direction to restore the criminal prosecution
in the following terms:

>we hold that no specific ground for withdrawal
of the prosecutions having been set
out the quashing of the prosecutions requires
to be set aside ... The memorandum of
settlement ... leaves no manner of doubt that
a part of the consideration for the payment
of $470 million was the stifling of the prosecution
and therefore, unlawful and opposed
to public policy.

Then the Court rejected the "Fairness
Hearing" argument as well as the argument
that the settlement was vitiated because
it did not contain a "re-opener"
clause to take into consideration those injuries
that were not anticipated earlier.
This conclusion came after the Court
admitted that

>what was transacted with the Court's assistance
between the Union of India on one side
and the UCC on the other is now sought to be
made binding on the tens of thousands of innocent
victims who had a right to be heard
before the settlement could be reached or
approved ... Any paternalistic condescension
that what has been done is after all for their
own good is out of place.[^/44]

Dealing with the argument that, if the
settlement were to be set aside, the moneys
deposited would have to be returned
to UCC, the Supreme Court held that while
this may be true, UCC would be required
to abide by the earlier interim order requiring
UCC to maintain unencumbered
assets of the value of $3 billion during the
pendency of this suit. The Supreme Court
also directed the Union of India to stand
guarantee to make up the deficit in case
the settlement sum deposited proved for
any reason to be inadequate.

Justice Ahmadi wrote a dissenting judgment.
"I find it difficult to persuade myself
to the view that if the settlement fund is
found to be insufficient, the shortfall must
be made good by the Union of India".[^/45]

In May 1996, a public interest petition
was filed in the Supreme Court on behalf
of the victims complaining that from 1994
onwards instructions were issued to
the deputy commissioners adjudicating
claims not to continue with the adjudication
and to direct all claimants to go to the
Lok Adalats. The grievance was made that
since adjudication has come to a grinding
halt the victims were compelled to go to
the Lok Adalats where "payments were restricted
to the bare minimum of Rs 25,000
in a large number of cases".[^/46]

# Quashing the Charges

In September 1996, a Bench of the
Supreme Court quashed the charges
against the accused persons[^/47] overriding
the submissions of the Additional Solicitor
General appearing for the Union of India
who submitted that "there was ample
material produced by the prosecution
which clearly indicated that all the accused
concerned shared common criminal
knowledge about the potential danger of
escape of the lethal gas".[^/48] Such was also
the finding of the Vardarajan Committee,
which was appointed by the Government
of India to look into the causes of the accident.
The evidence on record showed

>that these accused even though stationed at
Bombay shared the criminal knowledge of
the other personnel of the company who
were actually handling the Bhopal plant ...
had criminal knowledge regarding the defective
working of the plant and ... were no
longer interested in its safe keeping ... (SO
that) no remedial steps were taken.[^/49]

Without going into the extensive evidence
on record pointing in the direction
of criminal culpability the Supreme
Court quashed charges under 304 Part in
(culpable homicide not amounting to
murder which is attracted if the act done
is with the knowledge that it is likely to
cause death but without any intention to
cause death), 324 (voluntarily causing hurt)
and 326 (voluntarily causing grievous
hurt) IPC. These sections were quashed
on the questionable reasoning that there
was no evidence on record to show that
the accused had knowledge "on that fateful
night" that "they were likely to cause
death".[^/50] This phrase "on that fateful
night" is found repeatedly in the judgment.
What the Court is saying therefore is that
although the accused generally understood
that they were storing a highly toxic
chemical in an inappropriate manner and
in a dangerously defective plant and knew
generally that the leakage of gas could
cause death nevertheless they were liable
to be exonerated of these charges because
there was no evidence to show that they
knew that the gas was likely to leak "on
that fateful day" causing death. After
quashing all the charges thus, the accused
would have been discharged. To avoid this,
the Supreme Court introduced the charge
of criminal negligence under Section 304-A.

# The Decision of the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bhopal

By order and judgment dated 7 June 2010,
the Trial Court convicted all the accused
persons under Sections 304-A, 336, 337
and 338 r/w section 35 of the IPC 1860 and sentenced
them to two years imprisonment
and a fine of Rs 1,00,000 each.

The Trial Court noticed that industrial
licensing related to pesticides was granted
by the Director General of Technical
Development. Licenses were provided by
the Industrial Department of the Ministry
of Chemicals and Fertilisers, Government
of India for manufacturing 5,000 tonnes
of MIC-based pesticides. The government
of India also approved a foreign collaboration
between UCIL and UCC on the assurance
given by UCC "that the company have
technical knowledge of several years of
manufacturing MIC in USA successfully."[^/51]
UCIL acquired the Bhopal plant from UCC,
US, which was 50.9% shareholder in the
company. A Design and Transfer Agreement
and a Technical Services Agreement
were entered into between the two companies.
The Court records that "both these
Agreements categorically record that uca
was a global leader in the field of MIC
based pesticides having been engaged in
this field for many decades prior to these
Agreements. The accused Company made
every effort to acquire the best possible
technology and design that was then
available." The whole technology was imported
from UCC, US.[^/52] The entire plant
was set up by the UCC personnel under
control and supervision and start up procedure
was done by Warren Woomer, who
is a specialist in MIC.[^/53] This is how the
manufacture of MIC started at the Bhopal
plant in 1979. The Court also noted that
"in 1980s an American, Warren Woomer
came to India and remained here for two
years in the capacity of General Works
Manager".[^/54]

The Court elaborately set out the "major
design defects brought to the notice of
the Court".[^/55] Also that "the problem was
made worse by the plants' location near a
densely populated area, non-existent catastrophe
plants and shortcomings in
healthcare and socio-economic rehabilitation",[^/56]
and concluded that the parties responsible
for the disaster were UCC,
Government of India and Government of
Madhya Pradesh.[^/57] The Court found that
there was a storage failure in that huge
quantities were stored with all the safety
systems "either out of order or shut
down".[^/58] MIC is required to be stored preferably
at zero degree centigrade, but the
Court found that the refrigeration system
had been closed down and that "the
directions for shut down was given by the
Production Manager, S P Choudhary and
by Warren Woomer, overall in-charge of
the plant".[^/59] The Court also found that the
Vent Gas Scrubber and Flare Tower were
not in working order and were "kept shut
down".[^/60] "No explanation is there on the
part of the accused persons why it was
kept shut down/inoperational".[^/61] Though
the MIC was to be stored under pure nitrogen
pressure of 1 kg/cm² the pressure was 0.25.
That the plant was "running negligently"[^/62]
was reported by a team of experts
headed by Poulson from UCC, USA,
who came to Bhopal after the death of an
employee of UCIL in 1982.[^/63] Reports were
sent from Bhopal to UCC about the rectification
of defects.[^/64] The Bhopal plant was
at the time of the incident "running in loss
of near about Rs 5 crore".[^/65]

The Court then records the defence of
Keshub Mahindra to the effect that "he
only used to chair the meeting of the
board. He was not concerned with the
day-to-day business. He was not concerned
with the safety aspect."[^/66] None of
the matters were ever placed before the
board of directors.[^/67] These arguments
were rejected. Referring to the role of a
non-executive director, the Court observed
that "she is usually involved in
planning and policymaking ... are expected
to monitor and challenge the performance
of the Executive Directors and the
Management and to take a determined
stand in the interests of the firm and its
stakeholders. They are generally held
equally liable as Executive Directors ..."[^/68]
The Court concluded that the present case
was "not a case of vicarious, but a personal
liability. In the modern times, there is
an ever increasing awareness and expectations
of the duties and responsibilities of
large corporations in matters of health
and safety."[^/69] Then the conviction and the
sentence followed.

In concluding the Chief Judicial Magistrate
observed:

>the tragedy was caused by the synergy of the
very worst of American and Indian cultures.
An American corporation cynically used a
third world country to escape from the increasingly
strict safety standards imposed at
home. Safety procedures were minimal and
neither the American owners nor the local
management seemed to regard them as necessary.
When the disaster struck there was
no disaster plan that could be set into action.
Prompt action by the local authorities could
have saved many, if not most, of the victims.
The immediate response was marred by
callous indifference.[^/70]

The Court ended by declining payment
of compensation under Section 357(3) of
the Criminal Procedure Code on the
grounds that the compensation settlement
had been entered into. This is an interesting
point. Damages were awarded in the
settlement for injuries caused in civil proceedings.
Compensation in criminal law
proceedings is awarded "to reassure the
victim that he or she is not forgotten in the
criminal justice system. It is a measure
of responding appropriately to crime as
well of reconciling the victim with the
offender. It is, to some extent, a constructive
approach to crimes. It is indeed a step
forward in our criminal justice system".[^/71]
In that case the Supreme Court regretted
Courts not exercising "their salutary powers
under this section as freely and liberally
as could be desired".[^/72]

# Lessons of Bhopal

After 1985, judicial activism went into a
tailspin. Bhopal hastened the decline in
the standards of judicial decisions on the
environment more than any other case. It
taught industrialists a memorable lesson.
If you can get away with Bhopal, you can
get away with anything. If after thousands
of people died in Bhopal, Union Carbide
and the Board of Directors could get away
with petty compensation and no criminal
liability (under the 1989 judgment), then
one need not fear the law.

Poor people do not count. This was the
second lesson. The tragedy of Bhopal was
that the gas leaked into the quarters
where the poorer people lived. Had the
toxic cloud drifted in the direction of the
Secretariat, the Bhopal litigation may
have taken a different turn. As things
turned out the wind direction changed
and Arjun Singh, then Chief Minister of
Madhya Pradesh, was able to board his
helicopter and decamp.

Poor people died like flies and the litigation
dragged on for years. Advocates made
fools of themselves in American courts arguing
with fawning patriotic zeal that
courts in India were up to the mark, and
Judge Keenan took advantage of this to
disguise his basically pro-business attitude
with patronising sweet-nothings.
Who are we to tell the Third World what
they should be doing? They have their
values, their courts, their standards. Who
are we to decide what compensation is
payable? With words of this kind the
litigants were banished from American
courts, with their strict liability and high
levels of compensation and low levels of
judicial corruption, into the labyrinthine
mess of the Indian judicial system.

# Double Standards

Thus, with Keenan's judgment, double
standards for transnational corporations
became the norm. American corporations
were required to follow higher standards
of safety in America and also abide by
the right to information laws and the
higher level of compensation. But operating
in the backwaters of the developing
world, they were free to work in secrecy,
bribe officials and lie in court. Were
transnational corporations to be prosecuted
in American courts according to
American law for disasters abroad, the
occupational health and safety scene in
the developing world would have
improved dramatically.

The undue haste with which the full
Bench of the Supreme Court pushed
through the settlement and quashed the
criminal proceedings was later partially
corrected when the Court reversed itself
and restored criminal liability. This haste
to push through the settlement was in
sharp contrast to the manner in which the
judicial proceedings went on for years. The
Court's performance was a fitting answer
to Nani Palkhivala's grand arguments that
the Indian judicial system was competent
to handle the Bhopal litigation.

And when Chief Justice Pathak went to
the World Court at The Hague soon after
criminal liability was quashed and then
tried to hang on for a second term by
unusual means, eyebrows were raised.
The result of all this was a clear signal to
the lower judiciary that the environment
was taboo and to industrialists that it was
business as usual.

So, many years later, when an inflammable
gas leaked and ignited causing an
explosion that shook the Indian Petrochemical
Corporation Ltd's (IPCL) factory
at Nagothane in Maharashtra and
killed 50 workers, it was history repeating itself.
The management was hopelessly unprepared.
The hospital within the complex in
which thousands resided had beds for
only seven patients. The doctors said that
they were not surgeons. They did not
know how to give an intravenous drip.
They claimed that they had neither the
equipment nor the medicines and that
they were never informed of how to deal
with victims of chemical explosions. The
hospital had only two ambulances with
two beds each. One was so old it broke
down at the gate. The workers' bodies
were, therefore, taken to hospital by contractor's
trucks. Acting in a panic the doctors
evacuated the factory without first
treating the injured and dying. They were
taken northwards towards Alibag over
roads pitted so badly that some of the
workers died on the way. After hours they
reached Alibag only to find the civil hospital
without medical supplies. The trucks
then turned around and came south to
Bombay. At Sion Hospital the doctors
found all the workers dead. They said that
had elementary emergency aid been provided
by spraying the workers with cold
water immediately after the explosions
and then by covering them in light cotton
clothing and had intravenous drips been
administered it would certainly have been
possible to save lives. As in Bhopal, transnational
corporations were involved in
the fabrication of the IPCL plant and these
foreigners were working in the premises
when the explosion took place. They immediately
left the factory and caught the
first flight home. Thus even after Bhopal
no industrialist had learnt that a disaster
management plan was necessary. Not
very different is the story of the recent
hazardous chemical leak from Century
Rayon, Thane.

Government attitudes in Bhopal sent a
similar signal down the line to all the
expert bodies. When on behalf of government,
the Tata Institute of Social Sciences
sent a team to Bhopal to document the
number of persons affected and the degree
of injury, much work was put in but
the records are mysteriously missing. Voluntary
groups doing similar work had
their offices raided, their activists arrested,
their records seized by the police and later
destroyed so that documentation of the
nature and extent of injuries was
deliberately done away with leading
ultimately to only about one-third of the
victims getting compensation. From the
top came the warning to zealous officers
that the environment was not to be
taken seriously.

The courts and the government repeated
this performance when activists of the
Narmada Bachao Andolan were routinely
beaten up and arrested and treated as
anti-nationals and anti-development.
Despite the failings of the Narmada project,
the high court refused to entertain the
petition and the Supreme Court in this
matter of national importance passed a one
page order directing the construction to
proceed apace with perfunctory remarks
regarding rehabilitation. As with the
Amnesty report on torture in India, it
sometimes takes a foreign committee's report
to make India sit up and take notice.
There could not be a more scathing indictment
of the Narmada project than the
Morse Committee report. Yet, in a situation
where the governments of Gujarat,
Madhya Pradesh, and Maharashtra have
no intention of rehabilitating anyone according
to the Narmada Water Disputes
Tribunal. Award and the supplementary
agreements, all that B D Sharma, the intrepid
ex-Commissioner for scheduled
castes and Tribes could get from the
Supreme Court in his public interest petition
was a direction against him, for the
work on the dam to go ahead.

# Corruption

The casual attitude of the courts has
taught the pollution control boards a thing
or two. Steeped in corruption and headed
by politicians, these boards fabricate anything
for anybody at a price. At the centre
of the putrefaction of social life, the pollution
control boards --- themselves cesspools
of corruption --- have become a law
unto themselves. Reports are fabricated,
investigations stage managed, approvals
granted fraudulently and accidents covered
up. And the position of the Union
Minister for the Environment, once a
punishment posting, has become the most
lucrative ministry. Crores of rupees in
bribe money flow through the corridors of
Paryavaran Bhavan.

The pollution control boards get away
with this because courts do not question
their reports. In property matters, affidavits,
reports and other documents are
scrutinised closely by the writ courts, but
in environmental matters, even the most
outrageous, casual or contradictory reports
would pass muster. When expert
bodies act independently and fearlessly
then it is understandable that courts not
substitute their eclectic knowledge of the
subject for the scientific reasoning of the
expert body. But when the Pollution Control
Boards act _mala fide_, should the
courts keep their eyes shut?

The obsession judges have with the
amount of money spent on projects is
another misplaced concern. What law-breakers
routinely tell the courts, in
effect, is: "perhaps we have broken the
law and harmed the environment but we
have spent so much money; let us continue
with the construction, otherwise we
stand to lose more money." And the courts
succumb. Because of their property and
profit orientation, judges rarely calculate
the enormous costs in terms of environmental
destruction.

It takes courage to condemn a mega
project that will harm the environment.
But it must be done and in clear terms.
Judicial pronouncements on the environment
in India tend to appear to say much
more than they do. The Sriram case, for
example, used wonderful language and
several quotations and relied on many
precedents and is said to lay down the
principle of _strict liability_. The casual
reader might believe that strict liability
now exists in India. But when read carefully
the judgment is otherwise. Subsequent
decisions of the Supreme Court
have not taken the Sriram case as laying
down _strict liability_. We are told that one
of the judges who delivered the decision
 --- a prominent public interest litigation
proponent --- has, after retirement, in
opinions given to industrialists, said that
the doctrine of _strict liability_ as laid down
in Sriram's case was _obiter_.

Thus, after Bhopal, the separation between
what judges pretended to say and
what they actually said grew. Grand judgments
were not uncommon but they had
little effect because the operative part of the
orders were like little pipsqueaks as
compared to the lion's roar of the quotations
and lofty ideals. By these techniques the
judiciary caused the public to believe that
the judiciary was receptive whereas quite
to the contrary judicial decision-making
was characterised through this period by
timidity and domination by industry.

As the judiciary went into decline, the
movement grew and took on the dimensions
and characteristics of a mass movement.
Now we are truly on the threshold of a second
national movement. Public life has
become so corrupt, standards are so abysmally
low and looting the exchequer has
become so much a national pastime that
nothing short of a national cleansing of the
rot that pervades Indian society will do.

The environment movement once stood
on the fringes of the human rights movement
together with other issues as just another
issue. Today it stands centre stage.
The nexus between environment issues
and life itself indicates that the struggle
for a healthy and sustainable environment
is a struggle for changing the whole of society
itself. Basic values, attitudes, approaches,
priorities and lifestyles are
called into question and the environment
has transited in the people's minds from
just another issue to the subterranean
strata of all movements. It is not simply an
issue of forests or water or the air but the
living together in harmony of all people
and their harmony with nature.


[^/1]: See Ward Morehouse and M Arun Subramaniam,
_The Bhopal Tragedy: A Report for the Citizens Commission
on Bhopal_ (Council on International and
Public Affairs, New York, 1986).

[^/2]: _Mass Disasters and Multinational Liability: The
Bhopal Case_, prepared by Upendra Baxi and
Thomas Paul under the auspices of the Indian
Law Institute (Bombay: M N Tripathi, 1986), p. iv.

[^/3]: _Ibid_, p. 2.

[^/4]: _Ibid_, p. 225, 228.

[^/5]: _Ibid_, p. 228.

[^/6]: _Ibid_.

[^/7]: _Ibid_, p. 229.

[^/8]: _Ibid_, p. 162.

[^/9]: 1989 1SCC 674.

[^/10]: 1989 3SCC 38.

[^/11]: add.

[^/12]: 1990 1SCC 613.

[^/13]: 636

[^/14]: 655

[^/15]: 707

[^/16]: 705

[^/17]: 675

[^/18]: 693

[^/19]: 695

[^/20]: 673

[^/21]: 674

[^/22]: 677

[^/23]: 685

[^/24]: 705

[^/25]: 707

[^/26]: 709

[^/27]: 1987 1SCC 395.

[^/28]: 704

[^/29]: 712

[^/30]: 713

[^/31]: 715

[^/32]: 715

[^/33]: 715

[^/34]: 726

[^/35]: 726

[^/36]: 726

[^/37]: 1991 4 SCC 584.

[^/38]: 693

[^/39]: 612

[^/40]: 677

[^/41]: 614

[^/42]: 614

[^/43]: 677

[^/44]: 670

[^/45]: 690

[^/46]: 2000 10 SCC 507.

[^/47]: 1996 6 SCC 129.

[^/48]: 140

[^/49]: 154

[^/50]: 157

[^/51]: State of Madhya Pradesh through _CBI vs Sir
Warren Anderson_; in the Court of the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Bhopal, MP; Criminal Case No 8460 of 1996, para 25.

[^/52]: Para 34.

[^/53]: Para 34.

[^/54]: Para 34.

[^/55]: Para 37.

[^/56]: Para 38.

[^/57]: Para 38.

[^/58]: Para 53.

[^/59]: Para 56.

[^/60]: Para 64.

[^/61]: Para 64.

[^/62]: Para 78.

[^/63]: Para 78.

[^/64]: Para 8o.

[^/65]: Para 115.

[^/66]: Para 118.

[^/67]: Para 135

[^/68]: Para 137

[^/69]: Para 184.

[^/70]: Para 216.

[^/71]: _Manish Jalan vs State of Karnataka_ (2008 9 Scale 814).

[^/72]: 818
