Leftism in Indian politics, a development
of the years between the two wars, is at
present representated by: the pro-Congress
Socialist Party; the Communist Party of
India; the Forward Bloc; and the two leftist
splinters, M. N. Roy's Radical Democratic
Party and the Bolshevik--Leninist Party of
India allied to the 4th International. It came
of age only during World War II. To estimate
the probable future role of the leftwing
forces in India, it is necessary to assess
the relative strength and weaknesses of the
various parties through a brief recapitulation
of the events which strongly influenced
the development of these parties.

During the past quarter-century, the
Indian National Congress, led by Gandhi,
launched three mass movements (1919--21,
1929--32, 1942--45) which broadened the
base of Congress by bringing within its fold
both the workers and the peasants. The
failure of the first non-violent civil disobedience
movements impressed upon a
small group of serious-minded patriotic
young men the need of studying Marxian
thought, and of studying the history of the
October Revolution with a view to applying
the lessons of that epoch-making event to
Indian conditions. This group, formed in
1923 in Bombay, a city which provides the
sharpest labor--capital relations in India, became
the nucleus of the present-day Communist
Party of India. Realizing the importance
of the historical rôle of the working
classes, it devoted its attention to organizing
the industrial workers. Organization
of workers meant a demand for better
wages and improved living conditions.
When this was not conceded, agitation and
industrial unrest followed. The struggle of
the workers became an integral part of the
nationalist movement.

Gandhi, a reformer but not a revolutionary,
did not favor industrial strikes. In the
famous 1928 Bombay strike, he advised the
workers' wives to refuse to see the faces of
their husbands unless they returned to
work. He has always advocated company
unions, as opposed to trade unions. But
other front-rank leaders encouraged organization
of the workers. Jawaharlal
Nehru, on his return from the conference of
the League against Imperialism and his
visit to Moscow, became president of the
All-India Trade Union Congress. Communist
workers operated from within the
ranks of Congress, although they did not
always adhere to the Gandhi policy. In
1927, for instance, when Congress' goal was
vague and indefinite, the infant Communist
Party of India declared its objective to be a
Union of Socialist Republics of India.

By their extremist policy and their part
in industrial unrest, the Communists invited
the heavy hand of a steel-frame
bureaucracy obsessed with a fear of Bolshevik
Russia. Police searches and trials for
alleged conspiracy to deprive the King-emperor
of his sovereignty over India became
the order of the day, the most famous
being the Meerut conspiracy trial of
1929--33. In 1934, when the active membership
of the party stood at 150, it was
banned. Communist workers, almost all of
the present leadership, were harassed and
hunted from place to place.

Meanwhile, the failure of the second civil
disobedience movement led a number of
young men, educated in foreign universities,
to help Jai Prakash Narain found the Congress
Socialist Party. The Party, whose
patron-leader was Nehru, was weak. Because
it lacked experience in working-class
organization, it welcomed the Communists
within its fold. The Communists took over
the task of organizing the workers and the
peasants, and left the Congress Socialists to
maintain a close liaison with the Congress
high command and to influence its policy.
But the Socialists came to exercise a great
influence over the peasant leagues, which
federated into a central organization, the
All-India Kisan Sabha, in 1936.

Through its election manifesto and the
speeches of Nehru, Congress had promised
far-reaching ameliorative measures to the
workers and the peasantry. Once in office
Congress ministries became conservative.
Acting as a bridge between the Left and the
Right, Nehru, then President of Congress,
tried to influence the policy of the
Congress Working Committee. He took three
Socialists in his cabinet, among them Jai
Prakash Narain. But this unity of Left and
Right did not prove workable. Inside the
Working Committee, Nehru was opposed
and criticised for his leftish utterances. Indeed
this opposition amounted to hostility
from Vallabhbhai Patel, the dictatorial
spokesman of the Right. Jai Prakash resigned
from the committee, and it was only
Gandhi's intervention which dissuaded
Nehru from handing in his resignation.

Reaction triumphed in Congress leadership;
at a time when firm action on Nehru's
part would have led to a consolidation of
the Left, he sat on the fence. One of the results
of this policy of passivity was Subhas
Bose's expulsion from Congress. The leftist
bloc within Congress, feeling that the
promises to the electorate had been belied
organized industrial strikes and peasant
demonstrations all over India. As was
natural, this brought forth severe condemnation
from the Right wing of Congress.
Nevertheless, it will be true to say that at
this time Congress was a truly national
body, a movement rather than a mere
political party. It had within its ranks conflicting
interests, like the industrialists and
labor, landlords and peasants, Brahmins and
Scheduled Castes, Hindus, Moslems, Sikhs,
Christians, Parsis, Socialists and Communists
and elements of the extreme Right.
Opposed to it were two communal organizations,
the Hindu Mahasabha and the Moslem
League, in order of political strength.
Both these organizations represented the
vested interests in the two communities. The
League had been resuscitated by Mohammed
Ali Jinnah in April, 1936, with the
help of vested landed and monopoly interests
in his community. He had told them.
that Congress was going left, and that he
was opposed to "all talk of hunger and
poverty," which "is intended to lead the
people towards socialistic and communistic
ideas for which India is far from prepared."
The Moslem League did not become a political
organization representative of the
Moslems until after the Pakistan demand
was enunciated in 1940.

# A War Against the War

At the outbreak of war nearly all political
parties declared the war to be an
imperialistic war, and withheld support unless
a substantial degree of power was
transferred to the Indian people. Socialists
and Communists, working together at this
time, organized popular demonstrations and
strikes against the war effort. They called
upon Gandhi to launch a mass movement to
oust the British from India, and assured
him of all support from the working classes
and peasants. But Gandhi hoped to strike a
bargain with imperialism, carried on protracted
negotiations, using all his delaying
tactics, called the war a "just" one and that
he must support it "even when it is espoused
by an enemy." He declared that he would
do anything but face "red ruin."

Leftist workers organized large-scale
strikes against the war effort and in support
of workers' demands for increased
wages. In one place alone in 1940, 175,000
workers stayed away from work for 40
days. Countrywide arrests of workers'
leaders followed. At the beginning of 1941,
the Government claimed that "out of 700
detained in jail without trial, about 480
persons were almost without exception
either acknowledged Communists or else
active supporters of the Communist program
of violent mass revolution." Among
those arrested were followers of the Forward
Bloc, formed by Subhas Bose, who
disappeared from India and later found his
way to Berlin and Tokio.

The German invasion of Russia and the
Japanese conquest of Southeast Asia up to
Burma, brought about a decisive change in
the orientation of the leftist parties in
India. Nehru had called the war one of
liberation against the forces of darkness
and tyranny. The Communists too called it
a peoples' war. They were as much concerned
at the Japanese menace to India as
the Socialists were not. Jai Prakash Narain,
leader of the Socialists, said, "A slave has
no obligation to defend his country; his
only obligation is to break his chains of
slavery." He wanted a war within a war, if
Britain was not prepared to transfer power
to Indian hands.

The British Government expressed willingness
to hand over power if Congress and
League and other elements in Indian life
could agree among themselves. Congress
refused to compromise on the issue of
Pakistan, in spite of C. Rajagopalachari's
campaign for the acceptance of the League's
demand. The Communists too made themselves
unpopular with Congress by supporting
the League demand through their thesis
advocating a re-division of India into 17
provinces, based on ethnic, cultural and
economic affinities. Congress started preparing
the country for a struggle, and the
Government, realizing the rôle of the Communists
within the working class, legalized
the C.P.I. Before Congress could launch the
mass movement, the Government arrested
all the important leaders. The arrest was a
signal for a countrywide spontaneous outburst
of violence and sabotage; schools and
colleges closed down; post offices, police
stations and courts, symbolic of Britain's
hold on India, were burnt down; communications
were paralysed, and in a number of
places, parallel governments set up
Socialists characterized this sabotage
movement as a full-scale revolution, and
whipped up anti-British enthusiasm. For
a time such activities raised the stock of the
Congress Socialist party in the eyes of the
middle class. Jai Prakash escaped from
jail, led this underground movement, and
tried, unsuccessfully, to cross Nepal's border
to meet Subhas Bose, whose Indian National
Army had launched an attack on the
Manipur--Imphal--Kohima front.

Nevertheless, the Socialists did not
succeed in keeping the workers and peasants
from work. Here the Communist hold
became stronger. The C.P.I. inhered itself
into the hearts of the workers and
peasants. By their support of the workers'
demands and their help in fighting against
coercion, the C.P.I. came to secure the
largest number of seats on the executive
bodies of the 800,000-strong All-India Trade
Union Congress, the 700,000-strong All-India
Kisan Sabha. They were already in
control of the All-India Students' Federation,
with a membership of 70,000. Beside,
since its inception, the party has been
in control of the Progressive Writers' and
Artists' Association, which today includes
nearly all important writers and artists,
particularly the under-forty talent. The
membership of the party, 150 in 1934 and
4,400 in 1942, rose to 53,000 active members.
The party is a very compact and well-disciplined
organization, demanding a high
degree of political education. During the
1945 elections it contested 108 seats, and
won nine, eight of them labor, polling 19% of the votes cast. The popularity of
the party, which today occupies the same
position as did the League in 1937, was
again and again proven in the postal, railway
and labor strikes and the R.I.N. and
R.I.A.F. mutinies. Attempts made by the
Congress Socialists to set up rival workers
and peasants organizations have failed so
far, in spite of the support of Congress now
in office.

# Communists in the League

Another significant development of the
past few years has been the Communist
infiltration into the ranks of the Moslem
League. Starting with their support of the
League demand, the process of infiltration
was accelerated after 1942. More and more
Communists joined the ranks of the League.
They came to influence the local organs of
the League organization in Bengal, Punjab,
Sind, Assam and the Northwest frontier
province. When League ministries were
formed in four of these provinces, a
struggle ensued between the ministerialists
representating the vested landed and
business interests, and the popular League
organs in the provinces. The ministerialists
found it difficult to placate the progressive
sections, and on more than one occasion,
Jinnah had to intervene on the side of the
ministerialists. The provincial Leagues in
the Punjab and Bengal drew up five-year
plans for the economic development of the
two provinces; these are very socialistic
or communistic documents. So great was
the enthusiasm they aroused that Jinnah
had to follow it up and appoint a committee
to draw up a five-year plan for the
development of the Pakistan areas. The
All-India leadership of the League is still
reactionary, and it seems unlikely that the
younger elements in the provinces will
succeed in wresting the leadership for some
time. The day Jinnah departs from the
scene, however, there is little doubt about
the hands into which the leadership of the
Moslems will pass.

Although in the ranks of the Moslem
League, the Communists exercise great influence,
their influence in Congress is little.
The Congress leaders after their release
from jail in 1945, initiated a campaign
led by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, the
"sledge hammer" of Congress, against the
Communist Party of India. All key posts
were denied to Communists; they were expelled
from various provincial Congress
organizations, and subsequently, they resigned
from Congress to follow a Communist
policy without any compromises of
the united-front-with-Congress era. The
Congress leadership has viewed this development
with concern, and early in his
career in the office of the Home and Information
Ministry, a Member of the Government
of India, Sardar Patel, ordered countrywide
searches of the Communist and
Socialist Party headquarters and offices.

In order to enable the Socialists to win
over the labor and peasant organizations
from the Communists, the Congress high
command advised them to drop the word.
"Congress" from the name of their party,
which they did in April, 1947. But as yet
the Socialist Party of India has shown no
new line of policy distinct from that of
Congress, in spite of the fact that now the
membership of the Socialist Party involves
no obligation on a member's part to be
also a member of the All-India National
Congress, as it was before. In the words
of Jai Prakash Narain, the bond with Congress
has not been "broken"; it has only
been "loosened." So far the Socialists have
not succeeded in winning over the Bolshevik--Leninist
Party of India or the followers
of Bose. They must evolve a positive
policy before they can be a really strong
Left party in India.
