The West Bengal government's _Operation
Barga_ (_OB_), or programme for
rapid recording of sharecroppers, completed
its first year in August. The
_OB_ had raised high hopes among the
peasantry. Unlike earlier land reforms,
including those of pre-independence
days, it seemed to be a better thought
out and determined attack on agrarian
problems and seemed to have the
sincere support of the parties in power.

In fact so great was the enthusiasm
that even in remote, sleepy villages
poor peasants took out processions,
marched through paddy fields and
markets, chanted slogans like "long live
the Left Front", "long live CPI(M)",
"We want recording of rights", etc. A
large number of them participated
spontaneously in the reorientation
canps at Midnapore and Hooghly which
were organised by the state government
for mobilising public opinion in
support of the _OB_. This correspondent,
who had visited different parts of the
state at that time, had noted the extraordinary
jubilation among the
peasants.

But within few months these
hopes were disappointed. Instead of
bringing about any definite change in
the economic condition of the downtrodden,
_OB_ has become the hot-bed
of violent factional politics and has
drawn thousands of peasants into the
whirlpool of such politics. A second
visit to the districts by this correspondent
revealed a sharp fall in the people's
morale. Everywhere they seem
to be in the grip of despair and confusion
and are engaged in bitter
quarrels among themselves over narrow
personal gain --- a development that
has very much pleased the forces of
reaction.

Thus a plot already under cultivation
of a genuine record holder, is often
registered in the name of one, two or
more persons. This sort of multiple recording
is a very common phenomenon
in Langalberki, Khoirpur, Sastyangachhi
and many other villages in the Bangar
area in south 24-Parganas. The intruding
agricultural labourers in these villages
are supported by the CPI(M)
while the affected sharecroppers belong
to the CPI. The other constituents
of the Left Front have also resorted
to the same tactics in their respective
areas of influence --- the Revolutionary
Socialist Party (RSP) in the Sunderbans,
Jalpaiguri and Murshidabad and
the Forward Bloc (FB) in Coochbehar
and parts of Birbhum.

Such multiple recording, given the
size of the holdings and the number
of persons involved, will simply accelerate
the fragmentation of agricultural
land and make things worse for
the poor peasants, particularly in
mono-crop areas. In a mono-crop area,
a small plot with unfavourable climate,
Jittle irrigation facilities and low yield
cannot be economically viable. This
is particularly true for southern West
Bengal, The average size of a sharecropping
plot in this region varies
from one to one-and-a-half acres on
which a household of five members
struggles hard to subsist. Forcible
recording of any additional household
on such a plot will only aggravate
poverty and starvation, In many villages
in the Bhangar area, sharecropping
holdings have been reduced to
0.75 to 0.50 acre. The process of
fragmentation will not, of course,
cease here. Following the death of
the present sharecroppers, their rights
will pass on to their heirs and the
latter may further divide the holdings
according to their number.

Poor peasants are often instigated to
acquire one another's land in the name
of _OB_, An instance may be quoted
here. Dallaf Mian of Kotbar in Contai
area in Midnapore was a sharecropper.
When the Left Front caine to power,
the local CPI(M) leaders proposed
that he join them in evicting their
political opponents from their lands.
They assured him of a three-fourths
share of the crops. So, in the next
few months Dallaf and his associates
evicted many sharecroppers from their
lands. But when the harvesting season
came, the leaders did not help them get
the promised share of the crops. So
one day they caught one of the leaders,
heat him up and garlanded him with
old shoes and paraded him along the
village roads. This strained their relations
with the CPI(M). On April 23,
when Dallaf was working on his plot,
some CPI(M) supporters allegedly raided
his house and killed his son Javed,
The houses of his neighbours were
also attacked. A pregnant woman was
kicked and had to be taken to hospital,
where she gave birth to a still-born
baby. Dallaf also lost his small strip
of land.

In the irrigated zones, infighting
among poor peasants is over a different
issue. Landlords in these areas generally
grow one additional crop ('_boro_')
beside the traditional '_aman_' crop and
employ different sharecroppers for the
two crops. This makes conferring of
sharecropping right difficult, because
both the sharecroppers have legitimate
claims and under the provisions of _OB_
both are to be registered. The outcome
is anybody's guess. In parts of Burdwan,
Birbhum, Hooghly and Bankura
which have a network of canal irrigation,
such conflicts have already led to
a number of clashes which have often
taken a political colour. While touring
the Kansabati Project area in
Bankura this June, this correspondent
came across some peasants who narrated
their bitter experience of _OB_ and
complained that the lands where they
had worked as sharecroppers in the last
year had been taken away and given
to others. If they wanted to escape
starvation, they would now have to
work on the same fields as farm hands
on daily wages.

Small peasants are being equally
affected by the _OB_. The promise that
self-cultivating owners would not be
disturbed is nowhere honoured. Although
the Left Front has promised
them many economic benefits (for
instance, holdings upto four acres in
irrigated areas and six acres in non-irrigated
areas have been exempted
from taxation), small farmers are being
forcibly drawn into inter-party clashes.
At Bhanger, the local CPI(M) workers
have threatened small peasants that
none of them would be allowed to
retain plots over an acre in size and if
anybody was found in possession of
excess land, it would be seized and
distributed among sharecroppers or the
landless.

In Suri and Khoirasol regions of
Birbhum fake sharecroppers have been
tagged to the plots of small peasants
believed to support Congress(I), SUCI
and others. Most of these 'sharecroppers'
are colliery workers from the adjacent
coal belts. They have neither
any experience of agriculture nor any
connection with the particular plots of
land. About 30 per cent of the operational
holdings in the district are in the
hands of the small peasants and as
such they can be used as an effective
political force against the _jotedars_ and
rich farmers, but the way they are
being treated by the CPI(M) and
Forward Bloc may soon alienate them
from the Left Front and bring them
closer to the Congress(I).

In Midnapore, pro-CPI and pro-Janata
peasants have been subjected to
social boycott by CPI(M). This feature
is common all over the Contai sub-division
where, in almost every village,
many petty peasants owning one to
2.5 acre plots have been socially
ostracised. So severe is the boycott
that even if any relative of the affected
person dies, the latter does not get
any pall-bearer or priest to perform the
last rites.

Of the 46 lakh operational holdings
in West Bengal, 19 lakh belong to
small peasants. However, in order to
get rid of fake sharecroppers many
small peasants have started selling their
lands. A preliminary enquiry made at
Bhanger and Bhojerbat (South 24Parganas)
shows that during the last
one year local traders and shopkeepers
have acquired a considerable portion
of the agricultural lands from small
peasants.

In North Bengal, particularly in
Coochbehar and Jalpaiguri, a very crude
method is is being practised to bring
'rebel' peasants to heel. There is a
sudden spurt of dacoities in their
houses. The dacoits seldom take away
any valuables but severely beat up the
inmates, especially the head of the
family. Strangely enough, those who
soften their attitude and change their
political allegiance, never experienced
such night raids again. Parallel to
social boycott, some sort of economic
boycott is also in operation. Many
small and semi-middle peasants are
subjected to '_majur bandh_' or labour
boycott until they accept the nominees
of the party in power as their sharecroppers.
Either they have to keep
their land fallow or yield to the dictates
of the party bosses. Since they
have no second source of sustenance,
they have to opt for the latter course.

The parties comprising the Left
Front have themselves freely violated
the regulations which are supposed to
govern _OB_. At Kakatia in the Patrasaer
area, sharecroppers of a minister
in the state government were evicted
from his land shortly before the commencement
of _OB_. They were not
reinstated. A very prominent leader of
the district who stays at Chhatarkanali
in the Purandarpur area has lands
much above the ceiling. He did not
allow any sharecropper to be registered
in his plots. The same person
possesses several acres of land in
Burdwan and there too he has evaded
_OB_ obligations. At least three MLAS
in the district (from Ranibandh, Taldangra,
Kotulpup) have excess lands in
fictitious names (_benami_) and have prevented
their sharecroppers from recording
their rights. At Saltora, the
anchal pradhan has evaded recording
obligations.

In Coochbehar the FB is treading in
the footsteps of the CPI(M). In the
party's five assembly constituencies,
forcible replacement of 'enemy' sharecroppers
seems to be the order of the
day. The same is the case with RSP
in Murshidabad, Alipurduar and Sunderbans.

The partisan spirit is also reflected
in the village administration. The
local police, revenue and settlement
officials and the panchayat pradhans
have formed a cabal under the banner
of the party which has influence in the
particular area. The pradhans have
practically introduced a parallel administration,
From the district magistrate
down to the panchayat extension
officer, everyibody has to meekly surrender
to his whims. A number of
pradhans are said to have misappropriated
public funds, but no proper
inquiry has been initiated into such
allegations. Even the Panchayat Minister,
Debabrata Bandopadhyay, himself
has expressed deep concern over these
developments and warned that unless
these people are restrained the entire
system will dig its own grave.

Inter-party clashes within the Left
Front Over the _OB_, though not as
severe and widespread as in 1967 and
1969, are increasing in number. The
district administration is obviously
hesitant to disclose the correct figure
of such clashes. However, some idea
can be had from the developments in
Bankura where, according to very
high police official, between 40 and 50
incidents have been reported since the
last harvesting season. The progress of
the _OB_ in this district has been slow.
Still there have been such a large
number of clashes in a year. It can be
assumed, therefore, that in districts
having a larger concentration of sharecroppers
and multi-party influence (24Parganas,
Murshidabad, Malda, Coochbehar,
Jalpaiguri) the incidence of
such clashes must have been considerably
higher.

In Murshidabad there is open hostility
between the CPI(M) and RSP. The
latter consider the district as their
citadel and blame the CPI(M) of
attempting to wipe them out. In the
tea gardens in the Dooars, RSP trade
unions are facing slow but steady infiltration
of the CITU. On July 31,
three persons were killed following a
clash over a piece of land at Bansihari
in West Dinajpur. At Malbazar, RSP
has accused the CPI(M) of trying to
behave like a big brother. Clashes
between the two parties have also
been reported from Alipurduar (Jalpaiguri),
Gosaba, Basanti, Katalberia, Barjuri
(24-Parganas), etc. In Coochbehar,
while clashes between CPI(M) and FB
have not been very frequent, their
relations have not been friendly either :
The Forward Bloc has a very strong
base in the district, controlling five of
the nine assembly seats, six of the
eleven _panchayat samitis_ and 48 out of
the 128 _gram panchayats_. The president
of the _Zilla Parishad_ belongs to
the party, so also 12 of its members,
while the CPI(M) controls 10 seats
in the Parishad.

As soon as _OB_ was launched, disgruntled
landowners sought the intervention
of the Calcuta High Court
against the recording operation, particularly
its mode of notification. Wherever
the new reform tried to make any
headway, volleys of injunctions from
the High Court obstructed its progress.
For instance, in Basanti (Sunderbans)
alone 64 injunctions were served, one
them at the instance of prominent
CPI(M) supporter.

But the judgment that has greatly
affected the progress of the _OB_ is that
in the case between Biswanath Ghosh
and the state of West Bengal and others,
issued on June 7 this year. It delays the
recording procedure and provides landlords
with ample scope to resort to
malpractices. Also, by denying the
legitimacy of the interim certificates
given to the regional sharecroppers, it
challenges their eligibility for bank
loans. This has greatly disappointed
the poor peasants. This correspondent
discussed the problem with a high
official of a nationalised bank in Jaynagar
in 24-Parganas. The official said
that since the bonafides of the sharecroppers
was in question, they could
not apply for any loan. The CPI(M)
has proposed certain constitutional
amendments as a remedy to the legal
niceties of the High Court, ignoring
that mere amendment to any Actor
Articles of the Constitution cannot clip
the wings of vested interests and
redress the grievances of the poor. If
one loophole is plugged, another is
opened by its side.

A major allegation heard against the
Left Front is that it is not very strict
in its dealings with _jotedars_ and
rich farmers, Visits to different areas
in Birbhum, Burdwan, 24-Parganas.
Hooghly and Murshidabad confirm such
allegations. There a large number of
rich landowners including _jotedars_ have
been intentionally kept outside the
purview of the _OB_, while their neighbours,
many of whom are poor peasants,
have not been exempted.
