**Development of the Idea of Possession from the Idea of Inviolability
of the Person.** --- The source of law appears to be the idea of the
inviolability of the person, and the earliest development of law seems
to have consisted in an extension of the meaning of the term person. In the
beginning this extension of meaning probably followed common understanding.
Theft was deemed wrongful (theft for instance of a coat or weapon
habitually worn upon or attached to the body) because the res had, to
common understanding, become part of the person. The coat was looked
upon as a second skin, the weapon as a third hand, and to take either was
deemed an attack on the person, just as, nowadays, the theft of a wooden
leg might be thought of as an attack on the person. But, the notion once
accepted that a thing like a coat or weapon, separable from the person, and
often separated from it for shorter or longer periods of time, was nevertheless
to be deemed part of it, judgments finding wrong came to be supported by
finding other things much less closely connected with the person to be part
of it, and this extension of meaning went on till a generalisation was attempted.
The fact was recognised that protection was given to things not to common
understanding part of the person, and a word was found for the connection
between person and thing which made it wrong to deal with it-the word
possession. As we should express it, the law came to take a distinction
between things actually part of the person, and things "in law" part of the
person, and things "in law," part of the person were said to be possessed by
it. According to Savigny a violation of possession is to be deemed an injury
to the person.[^/2/1] This, very likely, was once the accepted opinion, for the
simple reason that a thing possessed was "in law " part of the person.

**Possession and Magic**.--- The meaning indicated by the etymology
of the word possession (and of the corresponding German word Besitz) is
that of continuance of physical proximity, a derivation indicating a perception
of the fact that things possessed were apt to be near the possessor. Nevertheless
the fact of physical nearness does not serve to explain possession.
How shall be explained this mysterious sense of duty which makes it wrong
to attack the thing possessed? It is natural to attribute it to magic, to deem
the res possessed by virtue of some spell imposed upon it, as do the natives
of West Africa, whose property law, we are told, is simply a system of
charms-said not to work altogether badly.[^/3/1]

[^/2/1]: Perry's Savigny on Possession, p. 27: "The inviolability of whose" (the possessor's)
"person extends to those sorts of disturbance by which the person might, at the same
time, be interfered with." _See also_ p. 329.

**The Explanation of Possession as a Dealing with the "Res" to the
Exclusion of Everybody resulting from Taking**.--- The founders of our law
were rationalists, however, and found another explanation. Possessing a
thing, they said, was dealing with it to the exclusion of everybody, and
a possessor possessed because he had taken the res, i.e. because he had
been dealing with it to the exclusion of certain adversaries. We may
imagine, I think, how this explanation came to be adopted. A seizes, holds
and uses a piece of land. Marauders are kept off merely by physical barriers,
displays of force, and fear of consequences. But A retains his hold, a habit
of submission to his will is formed, and a disposition, a sense of duty, arises
to respect his will to be unmolested. How does outsider B account for his
mysterious disposition not to interfere with A's enjoyment? A's dealings
with the res have created a certain expectation of continuance of his will
to deal with it without molestation, and the disposition resulting from habit
of submission to his will (a disposition deemed by B a dictate not of his own
conscience merely, but of the common conscience) has created an expectation
that his dealings therewith will not be hindered. The situation therefore
exhibits a probability of recurrent unhindered dealings on the part of A
which leads B to say he is dealing with the res to the exclusion of everybody
else. I take up a pen, obviously unused for the moment. Nevertheless
I say to the person at whose elbow it has been lying, "Are you using this
pen?" A succession of dots does not constitute a line. Nevertheless we speak
of a "dotted line," because the dots give the idea of a line. And, in the
same way, an anticipation of recurrent dealings gives the idea of continuous
dealing. In mid-winter I may say of certain meadows, "I am still getting
hay from them," although I never go near them except for a few days in the
summer. To this condition of continual dealing with the res to the exclusion
of everybody B attributes A's right of possession, and therefore concludes
that it constitutes his possession. In other words, a condition found to
exist because of disposition to give the right of possession is found to give
the right of possession. Possession, so conceived, is a fiction, a moral fiction.
I may have during a period of time neither will nor power to deal with the
res, but if "everybody would say " I was dealing with it during that period
to the exclusion of everybody, I have been continuously in possession. A
pigeon flies out of its house in the morning. Because of its known practice
of returning in the evening, the owner is thought of as possessing it, as
continuously dealing with it to the exclusion of everybody. He is "keeping
pigeons." But if the swallow I have caged escapes, I am not, to common
understanding, still dealing with it to the exclusion of everybody. I have
ceased to possess it. B moreover perceives that the reason why he deems
A to possess --- to be dealing with the res to the exclusion of everybody --- is
that for a period of time he has been dealing with it to the exclusion of
others, and therefore concludes that A possesses the res because he has taken
it. In some such way the idea that taking gives possession and possession
the right of possession must have come to be accepted as a rule of law.

[^/3/1]: Mary H. Kingsley's West African Studies, Macmillan, 1901, pp. 89, 407 _et seq._

**Reliance of Early Common Law upon the Idea that Taking gives
Possession and Possession the Right of Possession**.--- Taking gives possession
and possession the right of possession. This was the word delivered to the
fathers of our law and received by them with all readiness of mind. Their
right was, for the most part, right of possession or conferred by violation of
possession, their possession a fiction, moral or merely legal, according as it
did or did not conform to common understanding, a fictitious condition
imputed because of disposition to find the right of possession --- their taking, a
term swollen to an enormous content by the exigencies of legal decision.
Taking, rightful or wrongful, gave possession, and therefore the right of
possession. In the time of Bracton, according to Maitland, the very act of
casting out an owner gave the disseisor legal protection against strangers ---
four days' holding against the owner himself.[^/4/1] Ideas of conduct were conceived
as incorporeal things, and successful pursuit of the defined course of
conduct was deemed a taking of the incorporeal thing giving a right of
possession thereof. A lord's rights over his vassals were rights of possession
of incorporeal things acquired by taking, i.e. by compelling the obediences to
which such compulsion rendered him entitled. His subjects were thought
of as continually rendering specified obediences, and disobedience was
deemed wrongful because a violation of a right of possession by cessation of
obedience.[^/4/2] On the other hand a common man might possess an incorporeal
thing as against his lord. "No freeman," says the Charter of Henry III.,
"shall be disseised of his free customs." An advowson was a right of possession
of an incorporeal thing acquired by taking, i.e. by successful induction of
one's nominee into enjoyment of the living. "In your writ of right of
advowson," says Maitland, "you shall count that on the presentation of
yourself or your ancestor a clerk was admitted --- nay more, that your clerk
exploited the church, took esplees thereof in tithes, oblations, and obventions
to the value of so many shillings."[^/4/3] Taking appears to have been almost the
only juridical fact. Promise and succession received no recognition. An
heir had rights, not by succession to his ancestor, but because he was, in
contemplation of law, the same person as his ancestor.[^/4/4] Gift gave no right.
Taking was necessary to that. Gift was a mere permission to take, absolving
the taker from wrong. And to be valid even for this purpose special and
conspicuous manifestations of the fact of permission to take were required,
such as, if the res were land, a livery of seisin[^/5/1] If I was bound to pay
money it was not because I had promised payment. It was because I had,
in the eye of the law, made my creditor owner of the money. If I failed to
pay I was charged, not with violation of a promise, but with keeping the
owner of the money out of possession of it. My creditor brought his action
and declared that I had deforced him of his money.[^/5/2]

[^/4/1]: Maitland's Beatitude of Seisin, 4 L.Q.R. pp. 29, 33, 34.

[^/4/2]: Pollock and Maitland's Hist. of Eng. Law, vol. 1, pp. 181, 182, 512, and vol. ii. pp. 3,
4, 128.

[^/4/3]: Maitland's Mystery of Seisin, 2 L.Q.R. p. 490.

[^/4/4]: Holmes's Common Law Lecture, X.

**The Idea that a Wrongful Taking must be shown to maintain an
Action for Recovery of Possession, and that therefore the Defendant in such
an Action must have the Right of Possession.** --- An action for recovery of
possession is an action against a possessor. In the early days of our law it
was conceived that the defendant in an action for recovery of possession must
have the right of possession. If the action had been regarded as a vindication
of right to deal with the res, it would probably not have been so held.
If we conceive that the plaintiff in ejectment, notwithstanding the defendant's
right of possession, remains himself free to deal with the res, we need not
suppose his action barred by proof that the defendant has no right of
possession. The less the defendant's right the greater the plaintiff's. But
an action for recovery of possession, in its origin, was not regarded as a
vindication of right to deal with the res. It was deemed an action to punish
a wrongful taking.[^/5/3] Two ideas were accepted. Taking gives the right of
possession. Wrongful taking gives right to retake. The question arose: If
taking from A gave B a right of possession against everybody, A included,
how could A retain a right to retake? The problem was solved by supposing
a proceeding to take via legis a proceeding to punish a wrongful taking.
Actions for recovery of possession came to be regarded as actions against
wrongful takers, and if an action for recovery of possession is to be deemed
an action to punish a wrongful taking, then we must show a taking, with its
consequent right of possession, to maintain it.

This requirement had awkward consequences. A, for instance, drives B
out of his house and stations armed guards to keep him out. I may be
disposed to give B a right to retake via legis, but indisposed to find that A
has the right of possession. I have not the disposition to give A a right to
non-interference which leads me to think of him as dealing with the res to
the exclusion of the generality. I regard A as a wrongful taker, as dealing
with the res to the exclusion of B, and therefore conclude that B must have
his action. But I am disposed to deny A any right of possession, and, if I do,
must conclude that he does not possess and therefore cannot have taken the res.

**Escape from the Consequences of the Idea that the Defendant in
an Action for Recovery of Possession must have the Right of Possession
through Adoption of the Fictions of Ejectment.** --- Under English law the
inconvenient consequences of this rule that a defendant in an action for
recovery of possession must have the right of possession were successfully
evaded through adoption of the fictions of ejectment. Nowadays we still
think of a defendant in an action for recovery of possession as possessor, but
we are not embarrassed by the notion that if possessor he must have the right
of possession. If the action is brought against the tenant, we say the tenant
has possession; if against the landlord, that the landlord has possession. It
may be that under certain rules the landlord does not possess. Nevertheless,
he possesses for the "purposes of the action." And if the action is brought
against the tenant, and all persons whose rights to deal with or enjoy the res
are the source of his, or have the same source as his, or have his for their
source, landlord, reversioner, remainderman, sub-lessee, etc., we have no
difficulty in regarding them all as together possessing as against the plaintiffs.
Williams and Yates, in their book on Ejectment, say : "A person seeking to
recover possession must sue the person who is in possession of the premises
either by himself or his tenants. He may sue the landlord only, or only the
tenant in actual possession, or both together. A mere servant in possession
by permission of another is liable to be sued."[^/6/1]

[^/5/1]: Pollock and Maitland's Hist. of Eng. Law, vol. ii, p. 84.

[^/5/2]: _Ibid_. pp. 204, 205.

[^/5/3]: _See_ Pollock and Maitland's Hist. of Eng. Law, vol. ii, pp. 519. 572.

In the infancy of the modern action for recovery of possession this was
not the case. The defendant must possess the land in accordance with
general common law doctrine. If I brought my action against the landlord
and ignored the tenant, the landlord could defeat the action by showing he
had not the right of possession.

The chief part in the old action of ejectment was played by an imaginary
person called the "casual ejector." The action was brought against the
casual ejector, and the possessor was notified to defend it, and the fundamental
idea of the action was that if the possessor did not defend and
judgment was entered against the casual ejector, the casual ejector was to be
deemed, as against the real possessor, possessor for the purposes of the
action, so that, whatever the sheriff did by way of execution of judgment
against the casual ejector, the real possessor could not complain of any
violation of his right of possession.

The obvious course, therefore, of a plaintiff in ejectment would appear to
have been to notify everybody, who, it was apprehended, might possibly be
able, if not notified to defend, to convict the sheriff of dealing with the res
in violation of his right of possession. If everybody was notified, and
judgment was obtained against the casual ejector, then no one notified could
afterwards complain of violation of his right of possession by the sheriff.
But any person notified who did undertake to defend was substituted for the
casual ejector as defendant. And if he were not possessor, a judgment
against him would not justify an execution as against the real possessor.
Suppose, for instance, in a case of landlord and tenant, the plaintiff's lessor is
unable to determine whether the tenant is really a tenant or only a servant,
and therefore notifies both to defend the action, and that the tenant makes
default and the landlord defends. If the plaintiff's lessor succeeds, judgment
against the landlord will not justify an execution as against the tenant.
Moreover, to bring against any one an action for recovery of possession is to
allege that he possesses, and if the landlord puts the plaintiff's lessor to proof
of his possession, and the plaintiff's lessor fails, judgment shall be given
against him. Not only, therefore, in the case last supposed would a judgment
in favour of the plaintiff not justify execution, but the landlord, denying
and disproving the allegation of his possession, would obtain judgment for
costs against the plaintiff. A person bringing ejectment, therefore, was
careful to serve his notices to defend on possessors and possessors only. It
might be difficult to discover whether A was tenant or servant of B, but if he
notified them both, and only the one who did not possess defended,
judgment in his favour would avail him nothing, and, if put to proof of
defendant's possession, failure to prove it would saddle him with costs.

[^/6/1]: Williams and Yates on Ejectment, 2nd ed. p. 207.



A landlord, it was originally held, had nothing to say to an ejectment
brought against his tenant. One could only defend an action for recovery
of possession as possessor, and a landlord was not possessor. If his
tenant saw fit to defend, he might assist him. If not, judgment went against
the casual ejector, and the landlord had nothing to say to the action of the
sheriff. Such a judgment might be obtained through neglect of the tenant
to advise his landlord of the pendency of the action, or through refusal of the
tenant to allow the landlord to defend in his name. A tenant might be bribed
so to refuse, or to keep his landlord in ignorance of the pendency of the
action, by the plaintiff's attorney. Nevertheless, according to Tidd, it
appears to have been originally the rule that "if the tenant saw fit to allow a
judgment against the casual ejector the landlord could not prevent it," and
execution would be issued thereon. Later, however, a procedure was
devised which, without obliging the plaintiff to prove the landlord a
possessor, permitted the landlord to defend in his own name, and yet
allowed to the plaintiff a judgment against the casual ejector, to justify, in
case of execution, the sheriff's taking from the tenant. If the tenant,
contrary to his landlord's wishes, made default, although judgment was
entered against the casual ejector, execution thereon was stayed to give the
landlord an opportunity of making the defence his tenant might have made.[^/7/1]
If he failed, the stay was withdrawn, but not otherwise. In entering
judgment the landlord was treated as if he were not a defendant. If the
tenant defended, plaintiff obtained no judgment except against the tenant.
If he did not, plaintiff obtained only a judgment against the casual ejector,
and, on obtaining a verdict against his landlord, moved for leave to take out
execution against the casual ejector.[^/7/2]

It remained the rule that a person notified to defend as tenant who was
not tenant could defeat the action. Finally, however, the rule was adopted
that any one notified to defend as tenant must, if he wished to defend, admit
possession. Tidd says: "The lessor of the plaintiff was bound at the trial
to prove the defendant in possession of the premises for which the ejectment
was brought. But now, by a late rule of the Courts of King's Bench and
Common Pleas, in every action of ejectment, the defendant shall specify in
the consent rule for what premises he intends to defend; and shall consent
in such rule to confess upon the trial that he ... was at the time of the service
of the declaration, in the possession of such premises; and if, upon the trial,
the defendant shall not confess such possession ... whereby the plaintiff shall
not be able further to prosecute his suit against the defendant, then no costs
shall be allowed for not prosecuting the same, but the said defendant shall
pay costs to the plaintiff."[^/8/1]

[^/7/1]: Tidd's Practice, 8th ed. p. 548.

[^/7/2]: _Ibid_. pp. 500, 501.



That is to say, the defendants, made defendants as possessors in an
action for recovery of possession, shall not be allowed to say they do not
possess. The adoption of this rule facilitated the task of bringing an ejectment.
The plaintiff might be uncertain whether A was servant or tenant
of B. Nevertheless he could safely make him defendant as tenant. On
the other hand, if A was a mere lodger or weekly tenant from whom
no hostile action was to be anticipated, he could make B, the landlord,
defendant as possessor, and not make A defendant at all.

**The Action for Recovery of Possession made, through Adoption of
the Fictions of Ejectment, an Action against an "Adverse Possessor" whether
he has the Right of Possession or not.** --- So it came about that, in the action
for recovery of possession, any one made defendant as possessor could not
deny that he possessed. We may distinguish dealing with the res to the
exclusion of one's adversary as adverse possession. As I have said, although
disposed to give an action against an adverse possessor for recovery of
possession, we may be indisposed to concede to him the right of possession.
English judges, accepting the idea that an adverse possessor must have the
right of possession, escaped its consequences as to actions for recovery of
possession by making the possession of the defendant, whether adverse
possession or possession giving right of possession, an immaterial fact. But
an action for recovery of possession is necessarily an action against an adverse
possessor. Actions for recovery of possession are brought against persons
deemed to be adverse possessors, and the fictions of ejectment enabled them
to be brought freely against persons possessing adversely to the common
understanding, without regard to the rule of law that if adverse possessors
they must have the right of possession. It may therefore be said that the
effect of the fictions of ejectment was to make the action for recovery of
possession an action against an adverse possessor, whether he had the right of
possession or not.

When ejectment was abolished in 1875, an action also maintainable
against defendants without right of possession, the modern action for recovery
of possession of land was substituted for it. The only possession necessary
to the defendant in the modern action for recovery of possession, as in the
later days of its predecessor, is adverse possession. Is this true of the modern
action as it was true of ejectment, merely in the sense that a defendant in an
action for recovery of possession must logically be an adverse possessor, or is
it true in the sense that a plaintiff can be called upon to prove adverse
possession on the part of his adversary? Consider, for instance, the case of
Trustees v. Short.[^/9/1] An Australian "squatter," for a short time only, and at
a remote period, had occupied wild land. Lord Macnaghten, speaking of
the rightful owner, and of the subsequent period, said: "There is no one
against whom he can bring an action." In the old days, if, after apparent
abandonment by a squatter, I desired to fortify my title, I could bring
ejectment against a casual ejector and notify the squatter to defend his
possession, and the squatter could not say that he did not possess. And I
think that nowadays, if, in the case supposed, an action for recovery of
possession had been brought directly against the squatter long after he had
left the land, he would have been deemed possessor for the purposes of the
action, even if not deemed to possess adversely under the Statute of
Limitations.

[^/8/1]: Tidd's Practice, 8th ed. p. 546.



**The Idea of "Disseisin as necessary to support an Action for
Recovery of Possession, and the consequent Adoption of the Fiction of
Disseisin by Election.** --- In the early days of our law the idea was accepted
that every action for the recovery of possession --- the writ of right even --- must
in some way be an action to punish a wrongful taking, and, so far as possible,
every action was made to conform to this theory. One device directed to
that end was the fiction of disseisin by election. Blackstone says, for instance[^/9/2]:

>Even in corporeal hereditaments a man may frequently suppose himself to
be disseised, when he is not so in fact, for the sake of entitling himself. . .
to an assize of novel disseisin. ... The facility of that remedy induced
others who were wrongfully kept out of the freehold to feign or allow
themselves to be disseised merely for the sake of the remedy.

Suppose a deed to two as tenants in common. One of them enters and
exploits the premises exclusively for his own benefit without recognition of
his co-tenant's interests. Here is possession, adverse to the common understanding,
and the tenant's entry, if the act of a third person, would have been
deemed to amount to a wrongful taking. But, in the case supposed, because
of the appropriator's right of entry, no wrongful taking was apparent, and it
was held that the excluded tenant, to maintain an action, must show something
more, he must show a wrongful taking --- an ouster. If, for instance, he
had been in peaceful enjoyment, and his co-tenant had entered in his absence,
driven off his stock, removed his chattels, replaced them by his own, and
taken up his residence in the house, this would have been held to amount to
a wrongful taking giving an action for recovery of possession.

[^/9/1]: \(1888) 13 App. Cas. 793.

[^/9/2]: Commentaries, 9th ed. vol. iii. pp. 170, 171.



English judges accepted three ideas as to the action for recovery of
possession. It is an action against an adverse possessor. It is an action
against one with right of possession. It is an action against a wrongful taker.
Accepting these ideas, they nevertheless found themselves disposed in certain
cases where no wrongful taking was apparent to allow actions for recovery of
possession against persons to common understanding possessing adversely.
A lessee, for instance, holds on after expiration of his term, and refuses to
surrender the possession to his lessor. Here the judges found it difficult to
find a disseisin which would justify an action for recovery of possession. The
only taking apparent to them was the entry on acceptance of the lease, and
that was rightful. The difficulty was solved by adoption of the notion of
disseisin by election. That is to say, in the case supposed, the action for
recovery of possession was allowed, and justified on the theory that the lessor,
choosing to bring the action, had, by bringing it, become disseised by his
own election. By bringing the action he had created the disseisin necessary
to its maintenance. A, for instance, purchases from a life tenant and remains
in possession after the life tenant's death. Of this case it was said the
purchaser "could only be a disseisor in one way --- at the election of the
owner of the freehold and inheritance."[^/10/1]

**Adverse Possession without Disseisin, and Non-Adverse Possession.**
--- We find this holding on after expiration of right referred to as adverse
possession without disseisin. Of the case last stated, Abbott C.J. said there
was no ground for saying that the adverse possession of the purchaser had
operated as a disseisin of the son and heir. The purchaser "did not take
possession wrongfully, he only wrongfully continued in possession."[^/10/2] And
Mr. Justice Bayley said with reference to the same case[^/10/3]: "In order to bar
the power of devising a right of entry, there must be an actual disseisin of the
devisor; a mere adverse possession will not suffice."

It was found difficult, however, to regard possession in cases such as I have
supposed as adverse. Statutes had been enacted limiting the time during
which actions might be maintained for recovery of possession, and since, to
common understanding, the right of action was lost through continuance of
adverse possession, the period limited by the statute came to be regarded as
the period of adverse possession. The period limited by the statute did not
begin till accrual of the right of action, and therefore adverse possession, it
was concluded, did not begin till accrual of the right of action. But, according
to the theory of disseisin by election, the right of action did not accrue
until the pursuer had, by bringing the action, manifested his election to be
disseised and so given himself the right of action. Hence it was concluded
that the possession of the defendant before the action was begun could not
be adverse. So the possession which Abbott C.J. called adverse possession
without disseisin came to be known as non-adverse possession, and, until the
passage of the Act of 1833, this non-adverse possession, no matter how long
continued, did not bar the right of action for recovery of possession. If my
tenant held over my right of action for recovery of possession really accrued
immediately; nevertheless, in the eye of the law, it did not accrue until I
brought the action. Thereafter, therefore, and not till then, did the defendant's
possession become adverse. For instance in Nepean v. Doe[^/11/1] the
successor to a tenant pur autre vie brought ejectment against a purchaser
from the tenant pur autre vie. Denman C. J. said[^/11/2] the defendant's possession
was adverse on a certain date because an action had been brought and tried
between the parties sometime before that date.

[^/10/1]: Cullen v. Doe d. Taylersen, 11 A. & E. 1008, 1023.

[^/10/2]: _Ibid_. 1022, 1023.

[^/10/3]: _Ibid_. 1023.


As the adverse possession of a tenant holding over after expiration of his
term was deemed non-adverse, so, in the absence of "ouster," the adverse
possession of one tenant in common exploiting the res for his exclusive benefit
was deemed non-adverse. His co-tenant's right of action did not accrue till
ouster, and therefore, until ouster, his possession must be non-adverse.

**Vindication and the Modern Action for Recovery of Possession.**
--- The common law, therefore, while accepting the idea that an adverse
possessor must have the right of possession, came, through adoption of the
fictions of ejectment, to allow actions for recovery of possession against
adverse possessors without right of possession, and, while accepting the idea
that a wrongful taking was necessary to support an action for recovery of
possession, came, through adoption of the fiction of disseisin by election, to
allow actions for recovery of possession against adverse possessors who had
not wrongfully taken the res, and, through these developments, the common
law action for recovery of possession came to have a certain resemblance to
the action of vindication in which the petitor does not charge the possessor
with any wrong, but merely alleges that the thing is his, and in which the
defendant, although he must possess, need not have the right of possession.[^/11/3]
Savigny quotes from the Digest as follows: "It is the business of the judge
in this action" (vindication) "to determine whether the defendant possesses.
Some regard the action as only dealing with that possession which entitles
one to the interdicts uti possidetis or utrubi. I think, on the other hand, that
the suit may be brought against any one who holds the thing and has the power
to restore it."[^/11/4]

**Adverse Possession and the Limitation Act of 1833.**[^/11/5] --- The Act of
18335 provided, in effect, that no entry should be made or action brought
to recover land except within twenty years after the right to make the
entry or bring the action first actually accrued, and that whether the
defendant's possession had been "adverse" or not was an immaterial fact.
Its framers did not distinguish an adverse possession without disseisin, and
say the fact of disseisin should be immaterial. They conceived a right of
action for recovery of possession against a defendant who need not possess
adversely. When did the right of action begin if not with the beginning
of adverse possession ? They declared it should be deemed to begin
either with disseisin (which would make possession adverse) or with mere
cessation of the possession of the pursuer --- that it should be "deemed to have
first accrued at the time of dispossession or discontinuance of possession."[^/12/1]

[^/11/1]: 2 M. & W. 894.

[^/11/2]: _Ibid_. 912.

[^/11/3]: Perry's Savigny on Possession, p. 11: "In that suit" (vindication) "none other but a
possessor can be the defendant. ... The Roman law expressly lays down that vindication
may be maintained whether the defendant is a juridical possessor or not."

[^/11/4]: _Ibid_. pp. 57, 58.

[^/11/5]: 3 & 4 Wm. IV. c. 27.



This notion, however, of a right to take accruing through mere absence
of possession was not accepted. In Smith v. Lloyd[^/12/2] A conveyed land to B,
reserving the coal. For many years the coal lay untouched till finally B,
who had begun to take it himself, claimed that A's right to take it had been
barred by statute inasmuch as he had been out of possession for over twenty
years. Parke B. said, however[^/12/3]: "We are clearly of opinion that that
statute" (the Act of 1333) "applies not to cases of want of actual possession
by the plaintiff, but to cases where he has been out of, and another in, possession
for the prescribed time. There must be both absence of possession
by the person who has the right, and actual possession by another, whether
adverse or not, to be protected, to bring the case within the statute."

When Parke B. says the defendant in an action for recovery of possession
must show actual possession, whether adverse or not, to bring the case within
the statute, he means possession adverse to the common understanding. A
right of action for recovery of possession is a right to take the res from one
who is holding it adversely, and he says, in effect, that a defendant must
possess adversely, but that if he is possessing adversely to the common
understanding, it is immaterial, so far as the statute is concerned, whether he
is possessing adversely under the technical rules as to non-adverse possession.
And although Parke B. speaks of two conditions as necessary to the operation
of the statute, it is the adverse possession of the defendant which constitutes
his defence. His adversary need be out of possession only so far as adverse
possession puts him out of possession. As Denman C.J. says, speaking of
s. 2 of the Act[^/12/4]: "If one party has been in actual possession for twenty
years" (i.e. has possessed adversely to the common understanding for twenty
years) "whether adversely or not" (i.e. whether his possession has been
technically adverse or not) "the claimant whose original right of entry accrued
above twenty years before bringing the ejectment is barred by this section."

Nowadays, when the old law of "non-adverse" possession has been forgotten,
we simply say, "Adverse possession gives the action for recovery of
possession. Therefore adverse possession for the prescribed period, continuing
my right of action for the prescribed period, shall terminate my right
to take the res." The notion of an action for recovery of possession against
a non-adverse possessor no longer perplexes us.

[^/12/1]: 3 & 4 Wm. IV. c. 27, s. 3.

[^/12/2]: \(1854) 9 Ex. 562.

[^/12/3]: _Ibid_. 572.

[^/12/4]: Cullen v. Doe, d. Taylersen, 11 A. & E. 1008, 1015.



**The Action for Recovery of Possession barred by Continuance of
Adverse Possession, whatever the "Situs" of the Legal Right of Possession.**
--- Under the statute it is continuance of adverse possession which bars the
action for recovery of possession, whatever the situs of the legal right of possession.
Suppose A makes a lease of mines to B, reserving the land, and B
never enters thereunder. If we accept the idea that succession has nothing
to do with possession, then, under English law, the right of possession remains
with A, and if, after twenty years, B undertakes to take the res, A can say,
"I have had a right of possession for twenty years. You have had only a right
of entry." In Keyse v. Powell,[^/13/1] Campbell C.J. said of such a case that if B
had never acquired possession under his lease, so that he had enjoyed, after
delivery thereof, only a right of entry thereunder, his right of action for
recovery of possession would have ceased after twenty years. On certain
peculiarities of the case before him, Campbell C.J. found possession had
passed to the lessee. And it is safe to say, of any such case occurring nowadays,
that whatever our allegiance to the idea that succession has nothing
to do with possession, we should not consider the lessee's right of action
barred because of failure of the right of possession to pass from lessor to lessee.
We should deem it barred only by adverse possession on the part of the lessor.
Continuance of my adversary's right of possession does not affect my action
for recovery of possession. He must show continuance of adverse possession.
A person given the right of possession, as conceived to be dealing with the
res to the exclusion of the generality, need not be conceived to be dealing
with it to the exclusion of me. --- Take the case of Trustees v. Short.[^/13/2] The
defendant, who had occupied wild land for a short period only, claimed title
forty years afterwards by adverse possession. The colonial judges decided
in his favour, the Privy Council against him. And Lord Macnaghten said,
with reference to the claim of the defendant: "The rightful owner, on
abandonment, is in the same position, in all respects, as he was before the
intrusion took place." But was the defendant, after the cessation of adverse
possession, in the same position as before the intrusion took place? Suppose
that in the beginning he had entered into enjoyment as a _bona fide_ purchaser
under a forged deed, and tilled the land for a year or two, and had then left
it. He would, I think, have acquired a right of possession continuing after
his migration. The colonial judges, seeing an indefinite continuance of the
right of possession, decided that he had acquired title by adverse possession.
The Privy Council, seeing no continuance of adverse possession, concluded
that his right of possession had been lost by abandonment; that the rightful
owner was, on abandonment, "in the same position in all respects as before
the intrusion took place." The solution of the problem, I take it, under
English law, is, that although the defendant's right of possession continued,
his adverse possession did not, and therefore he had not acquired title to
the land.

[^/13/1]: 2 E. & B. 132.

[^/13/2]: 13 App. Cas. 793.




**The Adverse Possession "giving" the Right of Action for Recovery
of Possession, and the Adverse Possession barring" the Right of
Action for Recovery of Possession.** --- The Limitation Act of 1833 provides
that the right of action for recovery of possession shall continue for a
certain period only. As adverse possession is deemed necessary to the
action for recovery of possession, the Act has been construed to provide that
adverse possession for a certain period shall bar the action for recovery of
possession. Logically, then, the rule that the right of action for recovery
of possession shall continue for a certain period only, and the rule that
adverse possession continuing for such period shall bar such action, are the
same. Actually, however, they are not, for the reason that the term
adverse possession in the rule that adverse possession shall give an action for
recovery of possession has received a liberal construction, and in the rule
that continuing adverse possession shall bar the action for recovery of
possession a strict construction. Suppose, for instance, I own a tract of
vacant land in an urban district. A market gardener enters, builds a hut,
and dwells in the hut and tills the land for twenty years. All this without my
knowledge. I have had throughout an action for recovery of possession.
Nevertheless, if I finally do bring an action, it does not follow that the
"squatter" shall have judgment as having possessed adversely for a
prescribed period. His possession may not have been adverse under the
rule that continuance of adverse possession shall bar the action for recovery
of possession. In the first place the evidence of dominion is more or less
inconclusive. He may have been in the position of a person occupying a
reserved seat in the absence of the ticket-holder without intention of
holding it against him when he turns up. And assuming manifestations of
dominion, a question arises as to the fact of submission on my part. Can I
be deemed to have submitted to the squatter's will, in view of the fact that
I knew nothing of what was going on?

It cannot be said, therefore, that the rule of our law is the rule laid down
by the statute that the right of action shall cease after continuance thereof
for a certain period. The real rule is that the action for recovery of
possession shall be barred by continuance of adverse possession for such
period. The second rule is law, and it is not the same as the first. Take
the case of Lyell v. Kennedy.[^/14/1] This was an action for recovery of possession
brought against an appropriator of the rents of certain houses. One Ann
Duncan, who owned the premises at the time of her death, died intestate in 1867. At the time of her death the houses were occupied by tenants under
unwritten leases, one of them a tenant from year to year, the others weekly
tenants, and they appear to have been thus held until the action was brought.
The heirs of Ann Duncan remained unascertained during the period
1867--80. At the time of her death one Kennedy was acting as her agent
in respect of the premises in question, collecting the rents, etc., and during
the interval 1867--80 he continued to collect the rents and manage the
property. Up to 1880 he assumed to act as agent for the unknown heirs.
In 1880 and thereafter he claimed to own the property. In 1881 the heirs
brought an action against Kennedy for recovery of possession of the land,
to which he pleaded the Statute of Limitations. The Court of Queen's
Bench found the action had been barred. The House of Lords decided it
had not. After the death of Ann Duncan, and until 1880, Kennedy assumed
to act for the unknown heirs. Nevertheless, the Court of Queen's
Bench said, his conduct was unauthorised, and therefore gave an action for
recovery of possession. His assumption to act for the owners was inoperative
in the absence of ratification. The heirs' right of action, therefore,
having continued for the statutory period, was barred by the statute. The
House of Lords, on the other hand, felt that the possession of one assuming
to act for the owner, even if he acted without authority, could not be adverse,
and seeing no adverse possession in Kennedy until he claimed to be owner,
held that until then no action for recovery of possession was maintainable
against him, and that consequently the heirs' action was not barred by the
statute. Until Kennedy claimed to be in receipt of the rents for himself
Lord Selborne did not see how there could be an action against him for
recovery of the land. The Court of Queen's Bench was right, I think, in
finding that, so far as the heirs' right of action against Kennedy was concerned,
it was immaterial whether he did or did not act for the heirs. His
possession was adverse under the rule giving actions for recovery of
possession against adverse possessors. Nevertheless, they should also have
found that Kennedy's adverse possession had not continued for the statutory
period under the rule that continuous adverse possession shall bar the action
for recovery of possession. The House of Lords was right in finding that
Kennedy's adverse possession had not continued for the statutory period.
Nevertheless they were wrong in concluding that, until such adverse
possession began, no action was maintainable against him for recovery of
possession.

[^/14/1]: \(1887) 18 Q. B. 796; (1889) 14 App. Cas. 437.



The New York statute of limitation of actions for recovery of possession
of land[^/15/1] declares explicitly that proof of continuous adverse possession for a
period of time shall entitle the defendant to judgment, and this is really the
rule of English law, not the rule laid down by the Act of 1833, that
the action shall be barred by continuance thereof for a certain period.

**The Operation of Adverse Possession under English Law.** --- English
law therefore recognises two kinds of possession --- one, a condition giving
right during its continuance; the other, called adverse possession, importing
a continuing relation of dominion and submission, giving right
because of its duration. The operation of this adverse possession under
English law is not merely statutory. The wrongful appropriator of land no
longer acquires forthwith the right of possession thereof. The conscience of the
judge demands something more as a condition of the jus possessionis. I have
referred to Maitland's statement that, in the time of Bracton, the very act
of casting out an owner gave the disseisor legal protection against strangers.[^/16/1]
This is not the modern law. "A trespasser," says Sir Frederick Pollock,
"does not gain possession till there has been something like acquiescence
in the physical fact of his occupation on the part of the rightful owner."[^/16/2]
Whatever effect modern law may give to mere mastery, the ordinary condition
of acquisition of the right of possession of land as against the will of owners
is adverse possession. The submission of the owner to an adverse will which
will eventually extinguish his ownership, gives in the beginning the right
of possession to his adversary. Adverse possession must continue for a time
to give the wrongful taker the right of possession of land. For how long the
law does not tell us. "One year's possession under a lease," says Sir
Frederick Pollock, "has been held to be enough" (to show acquisition of
the right of possession), "though the lessor's title was not shown. Ten years'
possession has been decisive even against several years' subsequent possession
under colour of title."[^/16/3] Modern English law, that is to say, not only makes
duration of adverse possession a condition of the wrongful taker's ownership,
but also of his right of possession. It makes duration of adverse possession
for an indefinite period a condition of his right of possession, and duration
thereof for a longer and definite period a condition of his ownership.

[^/15/1]: Code of Civil Procedure, §§ 368--72.



Under early common law wrongful taking gave a right of possession both
of corporeal and incorporeal things, which was conceived to be a right to noninterference
as against everybody. The wrongful taker became an owner
although his wrongful taking gave his adversary an action. Disposition to
deny a wrongful taker any right to non-interference as against his adversary
has operated to modify the law in two ways --- in one way as to corporeal
things, in another way as to incorporeal things. The wrongful taking of
corporeal things now gives a right of possession which is not ownership.
In the absence of adverse possession for the statutory period, the right of
possession so acquired imposes no legal restraint upon the wrongful taker's
adversary, who remains owner of the res. As to incorporeal things the notion
that a right of possession must be a right as against everybody persisted, and
disposition to deny a wrongful taker any right to non-interference as against
his adversary led to abandonment of the idea of wrongful taking giving the
right of possession of incorporeal things. Wrongful takers of incorporeal
things, however, able to show "undisturbed use" for a period of time were
given the benefit of a fiction of gift. Modern law therefore declares, in effect
that, in cases of wrongful taking, the right of possession of incorporeal things
shall only be acquired by adverse possession giving also ownership.

[^/16/1]: Maitland's Beatitude of Seisin, 4 L.Q.R. p. 33.

[^/16/2]: Pollock on Torts, 6th ed. p. 371.

[^/16/3]: Pollock and Wright on Possession, p. 96.



Modern English law, then, allows the wrongful acquisition of rights of
possession and ownership of corporeal and incorporeal things by adverse
possession. It makes an indefinite and relatively short period of adverse
possession a condition of wrongful acquisition of the right of possession of
land, and a definite and longer period of adverse possession a condition
of wrongful acquisition of ownership thereof. But in the case of incorporeal
things, adverse possession giving the right of possession also gives
ownership.

**Construction, under the "Jus civile," of the Rule that Taking gives
the Right of Possession.** --- "The formulas of the Roman republican period,"
says Sir Frederick Pollock, "are already more modern and abstract
than ours."[^/17/1] The jus civile, like the early common law, accepted the notion
of taking giving the right of possession, and applied it freely in cases displaying
only rightful dealings with the res. But under the jus civile to
acquire by wrongful taking the right of possession, one must take by long
and undisturbed use, and such acquisition left no right in the person wronged.
The Roman law as to the effect of wrongful taking, therefore, begins, as we
know it, at a point of development which our law appears to be approaching,
but has not yet reached. If under English law it was now necessary to
"take" to acquire by wrongful taking the right of possession of land,
as it is necessary to take to acquire the right of possession of incorporeal
things, i.e. by undisturbed use for a period of definite duration, instead
of, as at present, by undisturbed use for a period of undefined duration, and
if such acquisition, as in the case of the acquisition by wrongful taking of
incorporeal things, was the acquisition of ownership as well as the right
of possession, our construction of the rule that wrongful taking gives
the right of possession of land would be much the same as that of the jus
civile. It is absurd, the Institutes say, to bring an action, allege that a thing is
mine, and ask to have it, if it shall appear that the defendant ought to give
it to me, for if it is mine I have already taken it and he cannot give it to me.[^/17/2]
This statement expresses the theory of the jus civile. Without distinguishing
between possession and ownership, it founded its property law upon the
notion that taking gave the right of possession but recognised no taking by
wrong except "taking by use" making the taker owner. So the common law
accepted the notion that taking gives the right of possession of incorporeal
things, but now gives effect to no taking by wrong except "taking by use
making the taker owner. The common lawyer of to-day might speak of
incorporeal things as the Institutes speak of corporeal things. He might say,
"It is absurd to say an incorporeal thing is not A's although he has taken it,
for if he has taken it, it must be his." According to the theory of the jus
civile, if I had taken a thing, rightfully or wrongfully, it was mine. Hence, in
cases of wrongful taking, the "eye of the law," under influence of a disposition
favourable to the person wronged making judges unwilling to deprive
him of ownership, saw no taking except in cases of taking by use.

[^/17/1]: Expansion of the Common Law, p. 14.

[^/17/2]: Inst. IV.6, 14.



**Construction of the Rule that Taking gives Possession under the
Edict.** --- As our law is either "law" or "equity," so Roman law was either
the jus civile or law embodied in the Praetor's Edict. For the Roman law
of possession without ownership we must look to the "equity side" of
Roman law, that is to say, to the Edict. Under the jus civile nobody had
the right of possession until he had taken the res, and, if the res was another's,
he was not deemed to have taken it unless he had "taken by use" or under
gift. If we think of possession as a fictitious condition of dealing with the
res to the exclusion of the generality, imputed because of disposition to give
the right of possession, we may say that, in the eye of the jus civile, nobody
had possession till he had so taken. To the common understanding, however,
possession might be wrongfully acquired without such taking, and the
jus civile in not recognising it was "inequitable." The Edict, therefore,
undertook to give protection to those who possessed to the common understanding.
We may say that at Roman law the possession recognised by the
Praetor's Edict, as well as the possession recognised by the jus civile,
was attributed to taking, but that in decisions under the jus civile
the term taking was construed in one way, in decisions under the Edict in
another. The jus civile recognised no taking of another's res except taking
by use or under gift. But in decisions under the Edict the term taking was
construed more liberally, as liberally as by the Plantagenet judges in applying
their rule that taking gave possession.

**Possession and Ownership under Roman Law.** --- A possessor was conceived
to be a person dealing with the res to the exclusion of everybody,
who therefore had a right of possession as against everybody. The finder of
a lost article, for instance, if adjudged to possess it, was given a right of
possession as against the owner. He who had taken "in law was given an
action to vindicate his right to deal with the res, and to this action a taking
"in 'equity" giving a right of possession under the Edict as against the
petitor was no defence. But, on the other hand, if I had taken "in equity,"
I had the benefit of various interdicts pronounced by the Praetor forbidding
disturbance of my possession, and to actions under these interdicts a taking
"in law," i.e. ownership, was no defence.

We conceive the owner of a thing to be the person free to deal with it as
he chooses. Under modern English law a person deemed to be owner of
a thing really is free to deal with it. Under Roman law, A, if entitled to
judgment in vindication, was deemed owner. Nevertheless, if B had the
right of possession under the Edict, A was not really owner --- that is to say,
he was not free to deal with the res. He had merely a right to be made free
to deal with it through prosecution of vindication. As against one endowed
with right of possession, the legal owner under Roman law occupied a
position analogous to that of equitable owner under English law, to that of
a mortgagor, for instance, who, barred from dealing with the res because of
the mortgagee's right of possession, might, nevertheless, through operation
of a decree in equity, become the legal owner.

**The Civil Law Doctrine of the Inseparability of Usucaption and
Possession.** --- "Usucapio," the Digest says, "est adjectio dominii per continuationem
possessionis temporis lege definiti."[^/19/1] In the eye of the jus civile
usucaption was not a continuance of possession. It was a process of taking,
the completion of which gave possession. But, in construing the Edict, a
person "taking by use," i.e. dealing with the res to the exclusion of his adversary,
was deemed to have taken it "in equity," and therefore to be possessordealing
with it to the exclusion of everybody. On the other hand, since a
possessor under the Edict was taken to be a person dealing with the res to
the exclusion of everybody, it was assumed that he must be dealing with the
res to the exclusion of his adversaries, i.e. if an adversary happened to be
owner, taking by use.

Here arose a certain conflict between law and common sense. The
possession found by common understanding is a condition of dealing with
the res to the exclusion of the generality --- a fictitious condition imputed
because of disposition to give the right of possession, which may, therefore,
be called a condition of law. To common understanding, a taker by use
need not be possessor --- there may be no disposition to give the right of
possession to a person dealing with the res to the exclusion of the owner,
and, on the other hand, there may be a disposition to give the right of
possession to a person not, to common understanding, dealing with the res
to the exclusion of he owner. But, under the civil law, takers by use
must be possessors, and possessors must be takers by use. The common
law notion of an "adverse possession" having an existence independent
of the possession giving co-existing right of possession does not receive
recognition.

**The Question whether Possession is a Condition of Law or a Condition
of Fact**.--- The operation of this conflict of law and common sense
may be perceived in the legal conditions, under Roman law, of usucaption
and the right of possession. The condition of dealing with the res to the
exclusion of one's adversary may be described as a condition of fact. The
fictitious condition of dealing with the res to the exclusion of the generality,
imputed because of disposition to give the right of possession, may be
called a condition of law. Finding only the condition of law, I may be
disposed to find the right of possession without finding taking by use.
A, for instance, takes title from a "squatter" on B's land, and enters
under his deed, but, after a short period of use and occupation, leaves the
premises, and thereafter has no dealings with them. At the end of twenty
years I may be disposed to find the condition of law --- to find that A is
still dealing with the res to the exclusion of the generality, and therefore
has the right of possession --- but not to find the condition of fact --- that
for twenty years A has been dealing with the land to the exclusion of B.
But, under the civil law, if I find one, I must find the other. The operation
of this contention of forces may be seen in the resultant rules of law.

[^/19/1]: Holland's Select Titles, 148, 3.



A judge indisposed to find the right of possession may find it because of
disposition to find taking by use. Take, for instance, the civil law doctrine
of possession of easements, a notion no longer recognised by the common law.
In a given case, feeling only the condition of fact, I may be disposed to
find that one is taking by use and yet to deny him any right of possession.
But under the civil law this disposition cannot be gratified. At common law
a person in process of acquiring a right of way through unresisted assertion
of will to pass, is in the position of one taking by use, but he has no right to
non-interference till after completion of a period of enjoyment. But, at civil
law, if a man is taking an incorporeal thing by use, he must have possession
of it, and therefore a right of possession.

Again, a judge disposed to find the right of possession may deny it
because of indisposition to find taking by use. The civil law denies the
right of possession were the common law allows it --- disallows it, for
instance, after the loss of the res. Regarding possession as a condition of
law, we have no difficulty in finding the right of possession unaffected by
loss of the res. But how can the loser be deemed to be still dealing with
the res to the exclusion of his adversary --- how can he still be taking by use?
The result of this consideration is the civil law rule that loss terminates
possession.

Or suppose, A being possessor, some mandate that A's possession shall
pass to B. I am disposed to find that B has the right of possession, but
indisposed to find that he is taking by use. How can he be taking by use
merely because of an order that he shall have possession? And if B is not
taking by use, it follows, according to civil law doctrine, that he is not
possessor, and therefore has no right of possession. This is the civil law rule.
B does not possess till he has taken the res. Succession has nothing to do
with possession.

On the other hand a judge, indisposed to find taking by use, may find it
because of disposition to find right of possession. A slave, for instance, runs
away, and is not heard of for a period of time. The difficulty of finding
adverse possession is the same as in the case of a lost article. Nevertheless,
the disposition to continue the right of possession dominates, and makes the
master still a taker by use. We possess a fugitive slave, the Digest tells us,
until some one else takes him, and until such taking the period of usucaption
continues to run.[^/20/1]

Here may be seen the source of the disputes of civilians as to whether
possession is a condition of law or a condition of fact. When, as in the case
of a lost article, we deny possession despite disposition to find the condition
of law, we conclude that possession must be a condition of fact. When, as
in the case of a fugitive slave, we find possession despite indisposition to
find the condition of fact, we conclude that possession must be a condition
of law.

[^/20/1]: Holland's Select Titles, 132, 14.


Savigny tells us that under the jus civile continuance of possession might
make one owner, but that mere possession did not give the right of possession.[^/21/1]
Here he is thinking of possession as a condition of fact, and is saying, in
effect, that under the jus civile one taking by use had no right of possession.
But if we think of possession as a condition of law, the statement that under
the jus civile mere possession did not give the right of possession is equally
true, for it then becomes an assertion that under the jus civile the right of
possession was denied despite a general disposition to give it, a fact sufficiently
proven by the equitable provisions of the Edict.

**Usucaption made by the Edict a Continuance of Right of Possession.**
--- The effect of the Edict, therefore, was to change the nature of usucaption.
Under the jus civile it had been merely a taking, a dealing with the res to the
exclusion of one's adversary. Under the Edict it became a continuance of
possession, of dealing with the res to the exclusion of everybody, and a question
of taking by use became merely a question of continuance of right of
possession. At common law, as I have pointed out, a question of adverse
possession is what a question of usucaption originally was under the jus civile ---
of continuance of dealing with the res to the exclusion of one's adversary. He
who relies on usucaption under the civil law need only show continuance of
the right of possession. He who relies on adverse possession under the
common law must show a continuance of dealing with the res to the exclusion
of his adversary. The civil law appears to impose the easier task, for to infer
a continuance of the relation of dominion and submission from a succession
of more or less equivocal acts of user is a difficult matter. But it is to be
borne in mind that under the civil law the right of possession is dependent
on the existence of "adverse possession" as it is not at common law. It may
be denied, for instance, because the loser of a thing cannot be thought of as
still dealing with it to the exclusion of his adversary. The difficulty under the
common law of saying whether adverse possession continues becomes under
the civil law the difficulty of saying whether the right of possession
continues.

The continuance of the right of possession which under the civil law
extinguishes ownership is not, however, a continuance of adverse possession.
Because of dominance of indisposition to find the condition of fact over disposition
to find the condition of law, the civil law has rules making certain
conditions of adverse possession necessary to the continuance of juridical
possession. Under these rules escape, loss, abandonment, etc., put an end
to possession. Nevertheless, because of dominance of disposition to find the
condition of law over indisposition to find the condition of fact, the civil law
finds a possession which to common understanding is not adverse. To recur
to Trustees v. Short.[^/22/1] There to common understanding, and by judgment of
the Privy Council, adverse possession did not continue after migration of the
occupant. But at civil law the right of possession of the occupant would not
have ceased with cessation of his use and occupation. In the absence of disturbing
circumstances, such as an ouster, it would have continued until he
had in some way manifested his will that his possession should cease. "If I
am retaining possession of a pasture in the forest," the Digest says, "because
of my intention to remain possessor, and become insane, I cannot lose
possession thereof so long as I remain insane, for a madman is incapable
of determining possession by act of will."[^/22/2] The occupant living long enough
without manifesting will to terminate his possession, the civil law would have
given him title by usucaption without regard to the period of actual occupation,
his possession would be deemed to have continued for the prescribed period,
but such a continuance of possession would not be the continuance of adverse
possession demanded by the common law.

[^/21/1]: Perry's Savigny on Possession, 5, 41, 42.



The common law finds no impairment of right through mere continuance
of another's right of possession, although the civil law finds ownership thereby
extinguished. Both findings are reasonable, for at common law the right of
possession of a wrongful taker is no right as against the owner, but at civil
law it is a right as against the owner, and if he suffer it to exist for a long
period of time without seeking the extinguishment thereof by resort to
vindication he may well be deemed to have lost his ownership.

[^/22/1]: 13 App. Cas. 793.

[^/22/2]: Holland's Select Titles, 141, 27.
