Four and a half years is a long time for a diplomat to
serve in India. Four and a half years is a very short time for
a Westerner to get to know much about India. India is not
only an Asian nation; it is a nation of almost four hundred
million inhabitants; it is a sub-continent. Because of its many
racial strains, its many regions, languages and customs, it is
indeed more comparable to the whole sub-continent of Western
Europe than to any one nation state in Western Europe.
India's predominant religion, Hinduism, is more remote
from the predominant religion of the West than any other
of the main religions of the world. India is composed mainly
of illiterate, ill-clad, hungry peasants living in mud or straw
huts. India is riddled by a social disease, casteism, to which
there is nothing comparable in the West. The Indians whom
the Westerner, and especially the Western ambassador, gets
to know, are almost all members of a small governing class.
This class constitutes less than one-quarter of one % of
the population, and it is not representative of the mass of the
people from whom it is divided by a deep gulf.

It is therefore with hesitation and humility that I
submit this valedictory report. ...

I have tried not to let recent developments bulk too
large in my assessment but this is difficult. This report is
written at a period of low ebb in India's fortunes.

The last election (1957) demonstrated the strength of
the divisive forces of casteism, communalism and factionalism.
The communists have secured a beachhead in Kerala from
which they can expand if the Congress Party does not have a
virtual rebirth. The failure of Nehru to strengthen his
cabinet by getting rid of some of the reactionaries and
incompetents and by bringing in new blood, arouses apprehensions
that his normal lack of ruthlessness and guile added
to his fatigue and increasing years may mean that he will
not lead the Congress Party to a rebirth.

India is facing an agricultural crisis because of its
inability to increase production beyond the level reached
three years ago. India is so short of foreign exchange and
domestic resources that unless it receives foreign aid
scale larger than that which now appears likely, it will have
to slow down the rate of its economic progress to a pace which
may be politically and socially dangerous. There is also
grave danger of inflation which is also politically and socially
dangerous. The Indians may not fully realize the dangers
to them of all these developments. Indeed, one of the most
serious aspects of the present crisis is the complacency of
almost all the Indian leaders. They are complacent about
Kerala, they are complacent about the failure of their
agricultural policy, they are complacent about the dangers
of inflation. ...

While complacent about many things, the leaders of
the Congress Party are, however, conscious of two difficulties
or dangers: one relates to Goa and one to Pakistan. The
Congress leaders realize that the people of India are becoming
increasingly impatient about the inability of the Government
of India to persuade Portugal to cede Goa to India. Many
people are demanding that the Government do something.
There is, however, nothing that the Government can do other
than use force, and India does not intend to use force.

The Congress leaders are also very conscious of the
danger to India of the continued arming of Pakistan by the
United States. ... To protect themselves they must build
up their armed forces. The cost in foreign exchange and
domestic resources will exacerbate India's economic and
financial crisis. It may make India dependent on Russia
for relatively cheap arms delivered quickly and on easy credit.
All this the Indians blame on the United States. These
developments come at a time when there is a great deal of
irritation and resentment against India in circles in the West
which are normally friendly to it.

# India's Liabilities

Independent India suffers from many handicaps in its
efforts to improve the conditions of its people.

India took over from the British regime in 1947 an
economy which, if not in decay, was at least stagnant. The
Indian peasant in 1947 was no better off than the peasant in 1900. He may have been worse off. Particularly from 1920
on the rapid fall in the death rate was resulting in great
increases in population. These were not balanced by
comparable increases in production. Independent India took
over from the British regime in 1947 a country whose natural
geographic and economic unity had been shattered by
partition. Partition was accompanied by communal strife,
mass murders, mass migrations. The scars have never healed.

Most of India is for most of the year afflicted by a
pitiless tropical sun which induces lassitude even in healthy
people, and much more so in people who are ill-fed and are
weakened by many endemic diseases.

Over four-fifths of its people are Hindus, and as
Hindus they have religious scruples against doing such
sensible things as destroying the fifty million useless cattle
that eat up the scarce fodder which the remaining two hundred
and fifty million farm animals could eat. The Hindus are
reluctant to destroy the fifty million or so monkeys that
damage their crops. They won't eat everything that is eatable;
if they had the food habits of the Chinese peasant, their diet
could probably be improved by twenty % with scarcely
any effort on their part. There are other traditions which,
though not directly linked with Hinduism, have their origins
so deep in history that they, too, are difficult to eradicate.
Even Gandhi couldn't persuade Indian villagers to
latrines and to use the night soil as fertilizer. Instead, Indian
villagers defecate on the fields near their villages, thus spreading
disease and wasting almost all the potential value of the
excrement as fertilizer. The villager in most of India persists
in using cow-dung as fuel instead of fertilizer.

Indian society suffers from a persistent and pervasive
feudalism. It is reflected in the importance attached to
status, in the arrogance of superiors to subordinates, in the
servility of many subordinates to their superiors.

Worst of all there is casteism. There are more than
five hundred sub-castes in India. A sub-caste is a frozen
occupational group. It has become something like a tribe.
Most Hindus are citizens of their tribes in a much more real
sense than they are citizens of their village, their state or their
nation. They are bound by the unwritten laws of their tribe.
It is their duty to help their fellow-tribesmen. A loyal
orthodox tribesman is inclined to vote for a fellow-tribesman
regardless of his party label; to get him a job regardless of
his merit; to get him promoted regardless of his merit; to
steer contracts to him. What he does for his sub-caste he
will do even more for those members of his sub-caste to whom
he has special obligations, his family, which can extend to
fourth cousins.

In addition to the curse of casteism there is the curse
of communalism. The great majority of Indians are Hindus,
but there are forty million Muslims in India, nine million
Christians, and seven million Sikhs. The Hindu communalist
considers the Muslims to be second-class citizens. The
Muslim communalist believes that the Muslims should band
themselves together in a politico-religious society to protect
their religion and customs from the Hindu majority. The
Sikhs and Hindus quarrel in the Punjab. The Christians
consider they are discriminated against.

In some ways communalism is comparable to sub-casteism
in its nature and its effects. The Muslim community
in India is divided into _Sunnis_ and _Shias_, and these two sects
behave in many ways like Hindu sub-castes. So do the Jains
and the Sikhs. The ancient Christian community in South
India retains the Hindu caste structure. Elsewhere in India
Christians are treated either as if they were a separate sub-caste
or as if they were still members of the Hindu sub-caste
to which their ancestors belonged, whether it is Brahmins
or, as it usually is in the north, untouchables.

But the depth and bitterness of the divisions between
many members of the various, different religious communities
in India is in general greater than that between sub-castes.
Moreover Muslim--Hindu antipathy in India is affected
by the antipathy between Pakistan and India. Any strain
on the relations between Pakistan and India strains
the relations between Indians of the Muslim and the Hindu
religions.

Since most Hindu sub-castes are regional, and the
religious minorities tend to be concentrated in certain regions,
sub-casteism and communalism strengthen the divisive force
of regionalism in India, a force already strong because it is
based on language and tradition and differences of economic
interest. Linguistic regionalism has recently been given
institutional form in the linguistic states into which India
has been divided. All these states, but two, are unilingual.
Each of the unilingual states will have its own official language
which will be the language of instruction in the schools and
probably in the universities.

Then there is factionalism. It is said that wherever
four Indians are gathered together there will be two factions
and each faction will intrigue against the other. Villages
are often divided into two factions. The provincial (state)
Congress parties are divided into factions. Civil servants are
likely to be split into factional groups in each department.
A faction is something like a political party. Not all members
of one sub-caste or one religion or one language group will
belong to the same faction, but one faction is likely to be
supported by the great majority of the members of certain
sub-castes, religious or language groups.

Another thing which retards India's progress and
weakens the fabric of its society is corruption. India presumably
has the normal kind of political corruption which
we used to have in Canada: a contractor, to get a contract,
must be on the patronage list, and he must pay the regular
tariff on the contract to the party funds; politicians get jobs
for party workers; politicians persuade or intimidate civil
servants into doing favours for deserving constituents; the
complaisant civil servant gets promoted. But Indian corruption
is more pervasive than this, mainly because wages and
salaries are very low, and the low-paid man needs more money
not only for his own needs, but so that he can fulfil his
obligations to his family.

Corruption wasn't as bad during the last hundred years
of British rule as it is today. By about 1850, the British had
broken with their eighteenth century traditions of corruption.
Moreover, British administrators in India were not subjected
to the same temptations as the Indian politicians and administrators
who succeeded them. The British were not members
of a sub-caste to which they owed loyalty. They did not
need to raise party funds. They could pay their party
workers' with titles from '_Rai Bahadur_' to knighthoods.
Presumably they steered government contracts to 'loyal'
Indians. Presumably their 'slush funds' for buying newspaper
support and so on came out of one of the many 'secret
service' appropriations. The British civil servant was much
better paid than the Indian civil servant of today. Under
the British, bribery, corruption and petty oppression were
rife up to the District Magistrate level, but not beyond. Now
they have reached higher levels and the higher the level that
is reached, the more grasping and oppressive does the man at
the bottom get.

Yet it is necessary to keep a sense of proportion. It is
easy for an Anglo--American to exaggerate the comparative
extent of corruption in India. Maurice Zinkin, who has
known India for over twenty years, first as a civil servant and
then as a businessman, asserts in his latest book that India is
less corrupt than most European countries and that in spite
of the nepotism and corruption that does exist, the Indian
bureaucracy is the best government service between Paris
and Vancouver. And he means going East from Paris to
Vancouver across the Eurasian land mass.

Undoubtedly, however, casteism, communalism and
corruption weaken the administrative machine and they
weaken the machine where it is weakest, in the states.
Mediocre men get appointed and promoted. First-class men
lose heart. But what is even more important is the effect
at the village level. The villager is accustomed to a conventional
level of corruption and petty injustice. He must,
however, have hoped that independence would bring less
corruption and injustice. If for long it continues to bring
more, he may withdraw his allegiance from the regime.

Here is an impressive, though by no means complete
list of the forces in India which are divisive, corrosive or
retrogressive. There are others: unemployment, particularly
white collar unemployment, under-employment, a propensity
to resort to violence, police brutality, the importance attached
to leisure rather than to other goods, a business ethic inherited
from petty trading rather than from an instinct of good
workmanship, a distaste for permitting the inefficient
competitor to be driven to the wall, a failure to appreciate
the role of profit in any kind of economy, capitalist, socialist
or mixed; an under-rating of the importance of monetary
rewards as an incentive.

When at the end of my tour in India I was discussing
with Nehru my analysis of India's assets and liabilities, he
said I had left out the most important liability, the doctrine
so widely accepted in India of 'live and let live.' This, he
indicated, had been a source of strength to India because it
had enabled pre-Muslim India to absorb one invading group
after another. This doctrine had even after centuries
sapped the intolerant, proselytising zeal of the Muslims of
India. But it also, Nehru said, meant that India was less
homogeneous than it otherwise might have been.

Certainly India would be less subject to divisive forces
if all its peoples had over centuries been melted in one pot
as most immigrants have been in the United States.

But I think that Nehru may have meant more than
this. The Indian doctrine of 'live and let live' can mean
not tolerance of differences but indifference to inefficiency,
shoddiness, corruption. I said at the time to Nehru that it
seemed to me that what India suffered from was a certain
lack of the ruthlessness in dealing with the inefficient and
the corrupt which is required for rapid economic advance.

I cannot recall since I have been in India any one of
the top thousand government servants being dismissed or even
severely reprimanded for inefficiency. I can recall only a
few instances of civil servants of outstanding ability being
promoted over the heads of their seniors. I cannot recall
that any one of the top ten thousand leaders of the Congress
Party has been sent to jail for corruption, and even loyal
supporters of the Congress Party must believe that several
hundreds of the top ten thousand deserve stiff prison sentences.

# India's Assets

Against this, what is there to put in balance? What
are the forces within India which can hold India together
and which can force a united India forward up the steep
mountain path of economic and social progress?

India is geographically a natural political unit, a subcontinent
cut off from the rest of the great Afro--Asian land
mass by three oceans and by the wall of the Himalayas.
There is no other great nation which has such distinct and
clearly defined natural borders. Most of the people in most
of the sub-continent have during most of the past two or three
thousand years felt that they belonged to a common culture
or society in something the same way as in the Middle Ages
people in Europe felt they were part of Western Christendom.
Hinduism has held the people of the sub-continent together
in spite of invasions, casteism, civil wars and anarchy.

Before the British came, India had never been united
under one sovereignty. The British brought the whole of the
sub-continent under their sovereignty or suzerainty, except
for a few small French and Portuguese enclaves. They bound
the sub-continent together with railways, canals and roads,
a national civil service and a homogeneous upper class. The
civil service consisted of administrators, judges, engineers,
medical men, army. These were 'all India' services, that
is to say, national institutions, not regional or provincial.
The Indians in these services were the core of the new upper
class the British created. This upper class consisted of Indians
from all over India who were homogeneous because they
had all been subject to a similar conditioning process. By
their education, their training, their 'whipping into shape'
by their British colleagues, their culture became a synthesis
of Indian and Western culture. Thus the British bequeathed
to India a relatively homogeneous governing class of political
leaders, civil servants, judges, military officers, engineers,
doctors, newspapermen, writers and businessmen.

The British also bequeathed to India parliamentary
institutions and a federal constitution. (The Indian constitution
is essentially the India Act of 1935). The reaction
against British rule brought into existence the Congress Party,
a national organization which extended across the whole of
India, with the exception of some princely states where its
activities were prohibited. The Congress Party was not the
kind of revolutionary party thrown up in other colonial
territories which consisted of leaders without disciplined mass
support. Nor was it something thrown up only in the last
years of colonial rule. It was the dominant political party
for thirty years before Independence. It organized mass
support in the villages. It was taught discipline by Gandhi.
It threw up leaders of the stature of the two Nehrus --- father
and son --- and Sardar Patel.

Thus the political leaders of independent India are,
in Nehru's phrase, 'children of the revolution.' They have
mass support in the country not because of the offices they
hold in government, but because they are children of the
revolution.

The party they lead is the kind of party which has been
able, after independence, to fulfil the purpose of a national
political party in a vast, heterogeneous country --- to be a
broker between conflicting interests --- regional, communal,
caste and class interests. It is this party which has made the
constitution and the parliamentary machines work reasonably
well. How different the picture would have been if almost
all the legislatures had not been dominated by one national
party with an oligarchical structure and, at the top of the
pyramid, an all-India High Command dominated by Nehru.

In listing today, ten years after Independence, the items
on the debit and credit sides of the balance sheet of India,
Nehru must be put down as one of India's most important
assets. He is by no means perfect and his weaknesses will
probably get worse as he gets older. He has many faults.
But what India is fortunate enough to possess is a national
political leader of genius, and even a tired and ageing leader
of genius is better than a vigorous, young mediocrity who is a
leader of a faction or a party but not of the nation.

These are some of India's assets: geographic unity; an
ancient cultural unity; a physical framework of railways,
roads and canals; a national civil service; a relatively homogeneous
governing class; parliamentary institutions; a strong
national political party; a national leader of genius.

India has other assets. The ordinary Indian displays
shrewd common sense in most matters not affected by his
religious scruples. He has no objection, for example, to
contraception. If, therefore, some effective method of
contraception can be developed within the next ten years
which is suited to an overcrowded, illiterate, poverty-stricken
peasant community, the Indian population can probably
be stabilized at a level of about five hundred million. Then
there is the patience of the peasant, his dignity and his gaiety,
his knowledge --- sometimes profound --- of a rich mythology
and folklore which incorporates much concrete wisdom amid
much dross and which stimulates and peoples his imagination.
and can give him comfort and serenity.

# Economic Progress in India

How important to the continued existence of India as
a united, independent nation is it for India to achieve and
maintain a relatively rapid pace of economic progress?

The orthodox argument is that India is faced with a
revolutionary movement of rising expectations and that stable
democratic government cannot long survive if these revolutionary
demands are not met. The demands are, it is said,
in part the result of the promises made by the Congress Party
when it was in opposition to the British. These promises
went further than the ordinary promises of ordinary opposition
parties because the governing party was foreign, because the
opposition party had never been subjected to the moderating
influence of holding power at the national capital, and
because the opposition party was revolutionary, and a
revolutionary party is apt to use revolutionary language.

A minority view is that the peasant has for centuries
been submissive to misery and injustice and that he is still
submissive. There is, therefore, no pressing political need to
raise his standard of living, though it is probably politically
essential to do something for the unemployed or underemployed
or badly paid educated middle class.

My own guess is that though the mass of the hundred
and ten million working peasants is still resigned or apathetic,
the leaven of discontent is working rapidly, and that if within
five or ten years their lot is not improved, the bulk of the
peasants will withdraw their allegiance from the regime.
In one way, satisfying the peasant will be easy. Oblivious to
the competition between India and China which the world
sees, the peasant will be content if every year he knows that
he is a little less hungry, that officials are a little less corrupt
and the police a little less brutal.

Satisfying the middle class intellectual is going to be
more difficult. Like the peasant, he will have to have more
material security. But he will also need to know that his
society values him; and he in turn must see sufficient virtues
in his society to reject the quick and brutal solutions which
China offers to India.

Failure to satisfy these two groups will be dangerous,
particularly if, as it probably would, a withdrawal of the
peasant's allegiance from the regime were to coincide with
mounting discontent among the unemployed or poorly employed
white collar workers, especially university graduates.
These could provide the leaders. The unemployed or underemployed
urban workers living in the slums of the big cities
could provide the mobs. Indian mobs resort easily to
violence. Indian police resort easily to beatings and firings.
The Indian people, the last election showed, are becoming
increasingly revolted by police firings.

If hopes of reasonably rapid economic progress are
frustrated, and even more so if there are economic setbacks,
all the divisive and corrosive forces in Indian society are
strengthened. If, on the other hand, the mass of the Indian
people come to believe that their economic and social condition
has improved and is likely to continue to improve, they will
have more confidence in themselves and in their leaders and
in their country, and the more confidence they have, the
easier it will be for them to withstand the divisive forces of
regionalism, language, religion and caste and the corrosive
forces of under-employment, unemployment, sickness, hunger
and hopelessness.

Substantial economic progress in India may be a political
necessity. Is it, however, a possibility ?

The population of India is now about 390 million.
During the next fifteen years it is likely to go up by five
million every year. Average income per person is about
285 rupees a year. In real terms this is probably the equivalent
of about $100 in Canada. The total value of the goods
and services produced in India every year is about two-thirds
of the total value of the goods and services produced in
Canada, and Canada has only one-twenty-fourth the population
of India. There are over ten million unemployed
employables in India. About one-fifth of the urban force is
either unemployed or is working for less than 25% of
the regular working time. The problem of the so-called
'educated unemployed' is particularly serious. Moreover,
every year the potential labour force goes up by two million.
Even if the Second Five Year Plan could be completed in
five years, it would not hold the line on unemployment.
There would still be over ten million unemployed at the end
of the plan period.[^/1]

[^/1]: After 1957 revisions were made in the statistical series from which
data in this and the following paragraphs was derived. For example, the
more recent estimates indicate that the Indian population in 1957 was
just over 400 million, not 390 million, that the annual growth of population
in subsequent years has been close to ten million, not five million, and that
agricultural production rose 30%, industrial production 42%,
national income in real terms 24% and population nearly 12% in the six years from 1951 to 1957.

And the Second Five Year Plan is not going to be
completed in five years. Because it is too large in relation
to the personnel and organization required to carry it out,
it would take six years to complete even if there were
shortage of foreign exchange. It will take seven or eight
years if India does not get enough gifts, credits or loans from
abroad.

But though the task is heavy and the possible pace of
progress at least in the next five years is slow, progress has been
made in the six years since the commencement of the First
Five Year Plan period on 1 April 1951. There are signs of
progress which are not susceptible to measurement, such as
the success of many community projects in bringing new life
into many villages as well as in persuading peasants to use
more efficient methods of production. There are indices of
progress which are reasonably accurate: the general index
of agricultural production, the index of industrial production,
and the estimates of total national income.

About half the national income is derived directly from
agriculture and allied activities, and during the past six years,
agricultural production has risen by over 20%.
Industrial production has risen by about 40%.
National income in real terms has gone up by about
16%, while the population has gone up by only about
8%.

There is, however, one disquieting fact which is masked
by these statistics of progress. There has been no increase in
agricultural production during the past three years. The
curve of rising production has flattened out. The official
explanation is that the crop of 1953--54 was miraculously high
because of especially favourable weather and that it has been
a considerable achievement to have been able to maintain
pretty much that level of production in spite of weather that
has been either average or a little below average. This
explanation sounded convincing a year ago. It is less
convincing today. Next year if there is no substantial
increase in agricultural production it will not sound convincing
at all.[^/2]

[^/2]: Agricultural production in 1956--57 did increase sharply to an index
number of 124.3 from the more or less static position of the previous three
years (114.3, 117.0 and 116.8). However, farm production again dropped
to 115.9 in 1957--58 before rising to a new plateau (well over 130) in subsequent
years.

But if in the next two or three years a steady upward
march of agricultural production is resumed, and at the same
time industrial production continues to increase at a rapid
rate, it will be reasonable to conclude that independent India
has been able to reverse a fifty year trend of economic stagnation
and decay. Grave doubt will be cast on the validity
of the thesis that since independence India has been coasting
along on the momentum given it by the British and using the
efficient administrative machine built for it by the British.
This argument is summed up in the description of Nehru
as the last British Viceroy. It is contended that when the
British-inspired momentum runs down, when the administrative
machine deteriorates, and when Nehru passes off the
scene, India will sink back into the rut of its lumbering
bullock-carts.

While a longer trend than that of the last six years
would be required to disprove this thesis, the economic trends
of the past six years certainly throw considerable doubt on it
in spite of the disquieting failure to increase agricultural
production during the past three years. This doubt is strengthened
if the economic trends of the past six years are read
along with other developments, in particular the successful
holding of two general elections, the completion of the reorganization
of the states, and the maintenance of stable
governments at the Centre and in most states.

_Compared with all the other countries in Asia between Turkey
and Japan which are of any size and are not in the Russo--Chinese
bloc, India's liabilities are small, its assets large, and its political
stability and its economic and social progress remarkable._

India probably has much the best administrative machine
of any of those countries. It has a strong, heterogeneous
national party. It has a dominant national leader of genius.
It is almost alone among these countries in possessing the great
advantage of a broad-based popular national government.
Its people work much harder than the indigenous peoples of
South-East Asia. India is technically the most advanced
country in Asia, next to Japan. The climate for foreign
investment in India compares very favourably with that of
most other Asian countries. India is already an important
industrial power. In another twenty years its steel production
may well be twenty million tons a year.

It has a large domestic market and diversified resources,
and its labour skills are developing satisfactorily. Outside
experts have recently concluded that in the long run India
can probably become a major manufacturing country and a
supplier of industrial goods and equipment to Asia and
Africa; that there seems to be no reason why expansion of
agricultural output at an average rate of two to three %
a year should not continue for many years, and that proper
application of known techniques, in conjunction with the
possible expansion of irrigation and the cultivated area, could
increase India's agricultural output four or five fold; that for
some time India should be able to raise its national income
at an average rate of four or five % a year, though
eventually, as higher income levels are attained, there may
be some decline in this rate; and that such an average annual
rate of economic growth should enable India to keep well
abreast of the increase in population which will be somewhat
over 1.5% a year in the next five years and might rise
above 2% in the following decade.

India may be a bad risk, but it is a better risk than any
other country in Asia of any size which is not in the Russo--Chinese
bloc. It is good that this is so, for India has more
people than all the rest of non-communist Asia combined.

While the prospects for India are bright compared with
the prospects of the other Asian countries not in the Russo--Chinese
bloc, India's prospects compared with those of China
do not appear so bright.

China has great advantages over India. It does not
have the pitiless tropical sun of India and its climate is more
conducive to hard work. Its people work harder than Indians.
The Chinese do not suffer as the Indians do from religious
inhibitions about certain foods. They eat anything that is
eatable. They are not stopped by religious scruples from
killing useless cattle or destructive monkeys. They use night
soil as fertilizer. China does not suffer as India does from the
divisive forces of casteism or linguistic nationalism. China
has a strong central government which can make its writ run
in all the regions of China; it is not inhibited by a division of
legislative powers with the provinces under which the provinces
alone have the right to legislate on such matters as agriculture,
forestry and education.

China, moreover, can take the short cuts of totalitarianism,
whereas India has to take the winding, democratic path
of government by discussion and persuation.

It is not surprising, therefore, that with every year that
passes more and more Indians of the governing classes become
more and more concerned with the possibility that their great
northern neighbour, China, will soon outstrip them in the
race for economic and social betterment. And the implications
of that for India, for the other countries of Asia and
for the world are enormous.

# India's International Relations

The general approach of independent India to foreign
policy has on the whole been consistent with the beliefs held
in the 'Twenties and 'Thirties by the left-of-centre leaders of
the British Labour Party: a willingness to give Russia the
benefit of the doubt, to ascribe the least damaging motives to
her actions; a suspicion of all attempts to erect a _cordon sanitaire_
around Russia; a belief that the surest way to war is an
armaments race between competing alliances; a pervasive
anti-Americanism.

This is not surprising, since those who frame Indian
foreign policy were in a very real sense in the 'Twenties and
'Thirties out-of-town members of the Cripps--Laski--Bevan
section of the British Labour Party. It was the Labour Party
which was sympathetic to the cause of Indian independence.
It was the Labour Party which was interested in removing
the evils of colonialism and racialism. The politically-minded
Indian, therefore, naturally gravitated to the British
Labour Party if he went to England to study. Whether he
was in England or India, he read the _New Statesman_ as his
bible.

The Indian was, of course, much more conscious of the
evils of colonialism and racialism than even the farthest left
members of the British Labour Party. Most members of the
Indian governing class have a personal bitterness about racial
discrimination, a bitterness often rooted in personal humiliations
which they have suffered because their skin was not
white.

Moreover, educated Indians are conscious that theirs
is the only great country of Asia to be conquered outright by
the West and to be ruled for generations by Western administrators. As
Toynbee has put it: 'India's experience of the
West has thus been more painful and more humiliating than
China's or Turkey's and much more so than Russia's
Japan's.'

Racial discrimination of white against coloured (though
not of the less coloured against the more coloured) came to
India as a result of the British conquest. British imperialism
meant to the Indian racial discrimination. Therefore, to the
Indian racial discrimination and colonialism are inextricably
intertwined. To the Indian, colonialism does not mean the
rule of one country by another country. It means the rule of
a coloured country by a white country. It does not mean
the rule of Russia over Hungary. It does mean the rule of
Britain over Kenya.

Since the Indian leaders are the ex-leaders of a revolution
against imperial white rule, they, moreover, have a
natural sympathy with leaders of other revolutions against
imperial white rule.

They are leaders of a country which suffers from great
poverty, illiteracy and disease. They believe that there cannot
be stability in India or in the world unless the poverty,
illiteracy and disease of two-thirds of the world are relieved.

They believe, therefore, that in leading an international
crusade against racialism and colonialism, and in pressing for
such international organizations as SUNFED, they are helping
to build collective security against war. They argue that it
is an extreme simplification of a highly complicated problem
to present the problem before the world as communism versus
anti-communism. Equally important, or more important,
are the demands of colonial peoples for self-government, the
demand of coloured races for racial equality, the revolt of
two-thirds of mankind against its poverty, its disease and its
illiteracy. All these, they say, have created a revolutionary
ferment in Asia and Africa. How to deal with this ferment
is as important or more important than how to deal with
Communism.

India is the most important country in Asia next
Russia and China. Nehru is not only the spokesman and
symbol of India; he is the most important statesman in the
whole of non-communist Asia. It is not, therefore, surprising
if India should interpret a failure by Western countries to
consult India on an issue which is important to India and to
Asia, as not merely a snub to Nehru but as a snub to India
and as demonstrating a failure to recognize the importance
of Asian, opinion and the profound changes which have taken
place in Asia since the war as a result of a revolutionary
ferment born of nationalism and an urge for economic
betterment.

# Indian Diplomacy

British diplomacy in the days of Gladstone and United
States diplomacy in the days of Woodrow Wilson and Kellogg,
suffered from the defect of reading lectures and self-righteous
sermons to the world, of offering such simple solutions
difficult problems as the Bryan arbitration treaties or Kellogg's
outlawry of war, of interfering in other people's domestic
squabbles, as when Congress in Washington demanded homerule
for Ireland, of dissipating one's influence over the policies
of other countries by trying to exert influence over too wide
a field instead of conserving one's influence for matters directly
affecting a major national interest.

By trying to do good in matters not of direct concern to
one's own country, but of very direct concern to other countries,
one irritates or bores other countries. This is not a
prudent thing to do if the countries which one irritates or
bores are friendly countries whose support one may oneself
need on issues of vital importance.

These defects in diplomacy are the defects of generous
youth or of gifted amateurs. They usually give place before
long to the middle-aged and bureaucratic virtues of discretion.
The application of these virtues to diplomacy means
asking on every issue of foreign policy not only what the merits
are but also whether the direct national interests of one's
country in that particular issue are sufficiently great to
warrant one's country doing anything about it; to exhaust
the resources of confidential diplomacy before publicly
criticizing other countries; to use the language of understatement
in criticizing friendly countries; and above all not
to attribute to friendly countries motives meaner than one's
own.

In the first seven or eight years of independence, Indian
diplomacy suffered from the traditional defects of generous
youth or gifted amateurs. In the last two years or so, Nehru
has offended much less often in these respects. ...

Indian foreign policy and diplomacy, though at times
exasperating to its friends, has a record of solid achievement
to its credit. In the first place, it has not divided India,
it has united India. In a country afflicted by such strong
divisive forces, this in itself is a notable achievement.
Secondly, India has helped to ease relations between the West
and Peking and to find solutions to problems on the periphery
of China--Korea, the coastal islands and Formosa, and Indo--China.
In Korea and Indo--China it has borne a heavy
burden in helping to implement solutions. Thirdly, India
by its insistence on the importance of meeting the demands
of colonial and coloured peoples for dignity and for help in
combatting their poverty, disease and illiteracy, has helped
to restore a sense of balance to the thinking of the West which
was so conscious of the dangers of Russian expansionism that
it had failed to attach sufficient importance to these other
dangers to the peace and welfare of the world. Fourthly,
India has exercised a useful, moderating influence on the
extreme demands of most other members of the Afro--Asian
group on colonial matters and on such questions as Cyprus
and Israel.

On the whole, however, Indian foreign policy since
independence must be judged to be a failure since India has
failed to achieve the most important goal of any realistic
Indian foreign policy, the establishment of good relations
with Pakistan.

As soon as it was clear that there was going to be
partition, the national interests of India required that the
primary objective of Indian foreign policy should be the
healing of the wounds of partition and the beginning of a
period of reconciliation which should eventually lead to even
closer relations between India and Pakistan than exist between
Canada and the United States. First, for example, a Permanent
Joint Board on Defence, an International Joint Commission,
special facilities for border-crossing, low trade barriers;
then joint organs for consultation on all matters of
common concern; ultimately a customs union and a defence
alliance.

Indian foreign policy and diplomacy have not been able
to make progress in this direction. The responsibility for
failure must, of course, be shared by Pakistan, but it is
reasonable to place the greater share of the responsibility for
failure on India, since India is about five times as important
as Pakistan, and it has had, unlike Pakistan, the advantages
of a strong, stable, popular national administration under a
leader of genius.

The stumbling block to the achievement of good
relations between India and Pakistan is Kashmir. In order
to hold Kashmir, India has sacrificed an immensely greater
national interest, and now Kashmir has been held so long by
India that a plebiscite in Kashmir would be contrary to the
national interests of both India and Pakistan.

The pro-Pakistan element in Kashmir would in a
plebiscite campaign appeal to the Muslims of Kashmir to
vote for union with Pakistan on the ground that Islam was
not safe in Hindu-dominated India. The campaign would
degenerate into an appeal to religious fanaticism. This would
greatly increase communal tension in India between Hindus
and Muslims. The Hindus of Kashmir, fearing the results
of a plebiscite might begin migrating to India. If the plebiscite
resulted in union with Pakistan this movement would
be intensified. There would be the usual stories of beatings,
killings, raping and looting. This might touch off mass riots,
mass murders, mass migrations in India and in East Pakistan
there might be a recurrence of what happened in 1947.
All the accomplishments of the last ten years would be
destroyed.

# Trends in Indian Foreign Policy

The Hungarian Rebellion of October, 1956, has persuaded
India that the regimes in Eastern Europe (other
than in Poland) are based not on popular consent but on
Russian arms, and that the only political entity outside Russia
and China which has freely chosen communism is the Indian
state of Kerala. The way in which Russia suppressed the
Hungarian rebellion has taught India that Russia is ready
to break all the five principles of _Panch Sheel_ if it considers its
national interests threatened. India is becoming increasingly
apprehensive over the long-run effects on the balance of power
in Asia, of the success which Peking appears to be having in
building up the material resources of China. The prospect
of the enormous strength of a China of 600 million people,
industrialized and militarized and totalitarian, terrifies India.

India has been shocked by what it considers to have
been an act of open, armed aggression by Great Britain against
Egypt in 1956. It has a contempt for the present French
Government both because of Suez and because of Algeria.
Its opinion of the United States has gone up greatly because
of the way in which the United States opposed Great Britain,
France and Israel over their attack on Egypt. ...

On some important matters, the differences between
India and the West over foreign policy may diminish during
the next few years.

The United States, by its dealings with Yugoslavia and
Poland, has been learning that the chief danger to the West
can more accurately be described as Sino--Russian expansionism
than as international communism, and it is possible to get
India to agree to the reality of the danger of Sino--Russian expansionism,
but not to the danger of international communism.
It seems likely that the representatives of Peking will be seated
in the United Nations within the next year or two, and that
most countries will by then have recognized the Peking
Government. The West, under pressure from the United
States, seems likely over the next few years, to adopt what
Indians would call a more liberal attitude on racialism and
on meeting the demands of nationalist movements in dependent
territories. The sooner this comes the better. Algeria
is a stumbling block to the improvement of relations between
India and the West. So is the failure of the West to condemn
unequivocally the actions of the South African Government. ...

The admission to the Commonwealth during the next
three or four years of Nigeria, Malaya, and the British West
Indies, will make the Commonwealth association much more
popular in India. Indeed the Indians may soon begin to
comprehend that when seven out of the twelve members of
the Commonwealth are coloured, the Commonwealth will
have become predominantly coloured, not white, and that
if the new Commonwealth has any centre, it will be Delhi,
not London.

The Indians may, indeed, discover that the Commonwealth
has become so useful a potential instrument of Indian
foreign policy that India will be serving its own national
interests if it goes out of its way to compromise on controversial
issues with the white members of the Commonwealth in order
to keep them from seceding from it. ...

# Conclusion

What will happen inside India, and in India's relations
with the rest of the world, depends on a multitude of factors.
Some are within the control of Indians, some within the control
of Westerners, some within the control of the Russo--Chinese
bloc or the Afro--Asian countries. Some factors, like monsoons
in India, and the date of Nehru's death or disability, are
incalculable. What I have tried to do is to analyze some of
the forces which I have seen working in India, some of the
trends which I have deduced. My own feeling is that, on the
whole, the omens are auspicious for India and for the West
provided that Nehru remains as the effective leader of India
for at least another five years and that the West behaves with
wisdom and patience.

My relative optimism is bolstered by my memory of
how far India has advanced in the last ten years, not only in
political and economic matters but in social matters. India
inherited from the British both a stagnant economy and a
social system that was almost stagnant. In ten years of
independence more has been done to eradicate the evils of
Indian social life than was done in the previous hundred
years under the British regime. Casteism in its social aspects
has been greatly weakened. The position of women who
have been the despised and rejected of Hinduism has greatly
improved. More children are going to school.

India has done all this. It has also achieved political
miracles: the welding together of the 500 princely states with
the rest of India; the redivision of India into linguistic
provinces; the successful holding of two general elections.

\ 

Toronto
