_"Cleaning up" the city usually employs demolition as an
effective tool to clear the lands and disperse the poor. But for
decades, the violence of demolition was tempered by a policy of
resettlement which, even when partially and imperfectly
implemented, gave demolition a veneer of legitimacy. But the
notion of housing for the urban poor has acquired an "illegality"
in the last five years. The judiciary has been a significant
contributor to this evolving jurisprudence on shelter, housing and
the urban poor. The constitutionality that ensured every citizen the
fundamental rights of livelihood, housing and shelter has now been
revised, reinvented and supplanted by a legality that sees the urban
poor as encroachers and a threat to civic existence._

\ 

The position of the urban poor has
always been precarious. "Slums",[^/1]
_jhuggis_ and squatter settlements,
where the urban poor find shelter and
housing, are not invested with legality. As
"encroachments" on "public land", they
remain at the sufferance of the state and
its agencies. When patience runs out, or
when a programme of cleaning the city is
being pushed, demolition is used as the
means to clear the lands and disperse the
poor. The violence of demolition was, for
decades, tempered by a policy of resettlement
which, even when partially and
imperfectly implemented, gave demolition
a veneer of legitimacy. The past five
years have witnessed the casting aside of
this fig leaf of resettlement, consequent
upon a unidimensional understanding of
the illegality of the housing of the urban
poor. In this, the obligation of the state
to ensure that "economically weaker sections"
(EWS) have housing; the link
between land acquisition for planned
development and housing for the urban
poor; and what constitutes the "public
interest" has got rewritten. The judiciary
has been a significant contributor to this
evolving jurisprudence on shelter and
housing and the urban poor.

The Pavement Dwellers' case (1985)[^/2]
marks the first serious contest, in the
Supreme Court, between pavement and
slum-dwellers and the power of agencies
of state to destroy their dwellings and
forcibly evict them. It was heard and
decided by a constitution bench comprising
five senior judges of the court, in
acknowledgement of the serious constitutional
questions that were being considered.
The judgment reflects the struggle
of the court in installing the right to shelter
within the fundamental rights framework,
while yet allowing the state the power to
clear the streets and spaces in the interests
of urban order. A conflict of interest was
found to exist between the pedestrian who
would need to use pavements and the
pavement dweller, and the "existence of
dwellings on the pavements (was) unquestionably
a source of nuisance to the public"
(p. 579), which the municipal corporation
was obliged to remove. It was also held
that "no person has the right to encroach,
by erecting a structure or otherwise, on
footpaths, pavements or any other place
reserved or earmarked for a public purpose
like, for e.g., a garden or a playground"
(p. 589). So, forcible eviction of
pavement and slum-dwellers was not ruled
out, although it was to be preceded by a
notice informing them of the impending
eviction and giving them an opportunity
of being heard. In the case before the court,
it was directed that, "in order to minimise
the hardship involved in any eviction, ...
the slums, wherever situated will not be
removed until one month after the end of
the current monsoon season ..." (p. 589).
This was only one visage of the order.

Lending another face, where the right
to constitutional existence of the urban
poor was asserted, reams were written to
explain

* That the right to livelihood is an important
facet of the right to life;
* That the eviction of a person from a
pavement or slum which will inevitably
lead to deprivation of the means of livelihood
is a position that needs to be established
in each individual case; that is
an inference which can be drawn from
acceptable data;
* That empirically it could be concluded
that people who live in slums and on
pavements do so because they have "small
jobs to nurse in the city and there is nowhere
else to live" (p. 575);
* They choose a pavement or a slum in the
vicinity of their work to cope with the
costs of money and time;
* That "to lose the pavement or the slum
is to lose the job" (p. 575).

And: "The conclusion, therefore, in terms
of the constitutional phraseology is that
the eviction of the petitioners will lead to
deprivation of their livelihood and consequently
to the deprivation of life" (p. 575).
Yet, since "the Constitution does not put an
absolute embargo on the deprivation of life
or personal liberty", the court could only
direct that the "procedure established by
law" to effect forced eviction be followed.

In justifying the existence of such drastic
powers, the state set out the scheme it
had for easing the pain of the urban poor,
and the court demanded the humanising
of the power by holding the state to its
word. So,

* Although providing "alternate pitches"
would not be a "condition precedent" to
eviction, the state government was mandated
to provide an alternative to those
who had been there from before 1976 "at
Malvani or at some other convenient place
as the government considers reasonable
but not further away in terms of distance";
* Slums, which had been "in existence for
a long time, say for 20 years or more, and
which have been improved and developed
will not be removed unless the land on
which they stand or the appurtenant land,
is required for a public purpose, in which
case alternative sites or accommodation
will be provided to them";
* The "Low Income Shelter Programme
would be pursued earnestly;
* The "'Slum Upgradation Programme' by
which basic amenities are to be given to
slum-dwellers will be implemented without
delay".

On the same day, the five judge bench
pronounced judgment on a similar petition
brought to them from Tamil Nadu. Having
set out the various schemes that the state
government claimed to have in place for
housing the urban poor, the court was
willing to conclude that "steps are being
taken for the purpose of improving the
slums and wherever they cannot be improved,
alternative accommodation is
provided to the slum-dwellers, before they
are evicted".[^/3] So, the court closed with an
expression of "confidence that the government
will continue to evince the same
dynamic interest in the welfare of the pavement
dwellers and slum-dwellers" (p. 541).

_Olga Tellis_ and _K Chandru_ were taken
to court in the early years of public interest
litigation (PIL). PIL was a judicial device
expressly intended to reach legal and
constitutional rights to a "person or determinate
class of persons (who) by reason
of poverty, helplessness or disability or
socially or economically disadvantaged
position (is) unable to reach the court for
relief".[^/4] PIL demanded exercises in "juristic
activism", as it involved introducing
variations into traditional litigation. The

(i) dilution of the rule of "standing", where
any _bona fide_ person could take an issue
to the court
(ii) the idea of "epistolary"
jurisdiction where a letter addressed to the
court may suffice for the court to take the
matter on board
(iii) the non-adversarial
expectations of the court when matters of
public interest were before it were among
the significant departures from the conservatism
of judicial procedure.

In reaching
fundamental rights to those unable to access
it on their own strength, the court acquired
a certain moral legitimacy. Tracing many
problems of the polity to executive apathy,
inefficiency and abuse --- bonded labour,
under trials forgotten in prisons, custodial
violence, for instance --- the court increased
its clout over the executive. The scandals
of the state dragged into public view in PIL
caught media imagination, giving the court
a populist profile. By the early 1990s, the
power of the court had been enhanced
considerably because of its PIL portfolio
and procedure.

By the 1990s, too, the definition of
"public interest" had begun to shift.
Corruption, misuse of discretion in the
exercise of public power, protecting
organisations such as the Central Vigilance
Commission and the Central Bureau
of Investigation from political interference
--- all issues of significance in any polity
--- became the agenda of the court, along
with a version of environmentalism. This
provoked attacks on "judicial activism",
but these attacks did little to dent the legitimacy
and the power that the court
acquired in this process. As the 1990s drew
to a close, what was not clear was the
extent to which the original constituency
of PIL --- the poor and the vulnerable to
whom constitutional and legal rights had
to be reached --- continued to have the court
on their side.

# The Right to Housing

The Turkman Gate demolitions in 1976
was shielded by the impunity that the
Emergency (1975--77) vested in those
who then wielded power.[^/5] This shared the
infamy with the mass arrests and detention
of the opposition, and the coercive
sterilisation programme launched amidst
the population, which led to the ignominious
defeat of the Indira Gandhi government
at the polls in 1977. In 1990, the
V P Singh government attempted identification
and enumeration of _jhuggi_ dwellers
with an intent to improve their condition,
and to work at providing security
of housing. In the climate created by this
pro-poor intervention, the Law Commission
produced a report asking for a law that
would give a statutory basis to the right
of a _jhuggi_ dweller to resettlement preceding
destruction of their homes.[^/6] Such
a law was never enacted. That was also
the time that earnest attempts were made
to bring in an amendment to the Constitution
to make the right to housing a fundamental
right. The V P Singh government
did not last long enough for these efforts
to reach anywhere.

In 1993, when the judiciary began to
express itself on the space occupied by
urban poor in the city, it was an entirely
different perspective that emerged. In
_Lawyers' Cooperative Group Housing
Society vs Union of India_,[^/7] justice
B N Kirpal, who was later to write the
_Almitra Patel_ order from the Supreme Court
bench, spoke for himself and his brother
judge: "It appears that the public exchequer
has to be burdened with crores of
rupees for providing alternative accommodation
to _jhuggi_ dwellers who are trespassers
on public land." This comment
accompanied a direction that where resettlement
was done, the resettled should not be
given the land on leasehold, as was the
practice, but on licence "with no right in
the licensee to transfer or part with possession
of the land in question". This was
intended to prevent the resettled from
treating the resettlement plot as property,
but to restrict them to the terms of licence
which, if breached, could result in resumption
of the land. This was the beginning
of the de-legitimising of the urban poor
who were cast as "trespassers" and as profiteering
on public lands. The draft annual
plan of the Slum and J J Department of
Delhi inducts this direction, and resettlement
plots have since been, governed by
_licence_.

In giving text to the licence, the
conditions may include:

>(4) The licensee shall have no ownership
>rights. They shall not be allowed to
>sell/rent the plot. If it is sold/rented, the
>plot will be taken back.
>
>(5) No one other than the licensee and
>her/his family may stay in the house/
>allotted plot ...
>
>(8) If an adequate house is not constructed
>within six months of allotment,
>the licence shall be terminated ...
>
>(12) If the licensee has taken a loan from
>HUDCO (for construction of the house),
>and has not been able to pay back the loan
>instalments for a period of six months, the
>licence will be automatically cancelled, and
>the licensee will be evicted from the plot.
>
>(13) Warning: Selling or buying the plot
>is against the law. In accordance with the
>directions of the Delhi High Court in
>CMP No 267 and 464 of 1993, the licensee
>does not have ownership rights. If
>anyone other than the licensee or his/her
>family is staying on the plot, licence will
>be cancelled and the person will be evicted
>without notice or without assigning any
>reason.

In February 2000, in _Almitra Patel vs
Union of India_.[^/8] while dealing with a PIL
on solid waste disposal, a three-judge bench
of the Supreme Court spoke words that
have had a dramatic impact on the lives
of the poor in Delhi. Delhi as the capital
of the country, the court exclaimed, "should
be its showpiece", and yet "no effective
initiative of any kind" has been taken for
"cleaning up the city" (pp. 684--85). "When
a large number of inhabitants live in
unauthorised colonies, with no proper
means of dealing with the domestic effluents,
or in slums with no care for hygiene,
the problem seems more complex."

Slums were also perceived to be "good
business" and "well organised", multiplying
"in the last few years by geometrical
proportion". To the court, slums represented
"large areas of public land ...
usurped for private use free of cost" (p. 685).
The "promise of free land, at the taxpayers'
cost, in place of a _jhuggi_" was depicted
as "a proposal which attracts more land
grabbers. Rewarding an encroacher on
public land with an alternative free site is
like giving a reward to a pickpocket." In
fact, it was "slum creation" and not "slum
clearance" that was occurring in Delhi.
This gave "rise to domestic waste being
strewn on open land in and around the
slums" which needed to be dealt with
"most expeditiously and on the basis of
priority". Creation of slums, which increased
the density of the population
beyond the sustainable limit, needed to
be prevented.

In 1996, the Industries Relocation case,[^/9]
which was about reconstituting the city
by exiling productive and manufacturing
activities beyond its limits as being
"hazardous", and _B L Wadhera vs Union
of India_,[^/10] where directions were issued to
get municipal authorities to clean the city,
had already begun to revise visions of the
city, who its denizens should be, and what
the government needed to assist in the
materialising of those visions.

_Almitra Patel_ marks the judicial moment
when

(i) illegality was singled out as the
trait of the slum-dweller, and
(ii) "cleaning
up the city" was declared to be the primary
task in which governmental agencies
needed to be engaged.

In this judgment, where providing "free"
land to a slum-dweller for resettlement was
decried, there is a significance in how the
court treated land being made available for
landfill sites. The problem, as the court
recounted it, was that "land-owning agencies
like DDA or the government of NCT
of Delhi are demanding market value of
the land of more than Rs 40 lakh per acre
before the land can be transferred to MCD".
But "keeping Delhi clean is a governmental
function ... Not providing (landfill sites)
because MCD is unable to pay an exorbitant
amount is understandable", especially
as "it is the duty of all concerned to
see the landfill sites are provided in the
interest of public health". Public interest
and state obligation was completely recast
in this judgment, where providing
housing to the urban poor was castigated
even a providing land free for garbage
was mandated.

It is instructive to test this depiction of
illegality against the performance of governmental
agencies under the statute. In
1957, the Delhi Development Act (DD
Act) was enacted to facilitate planned
development of the city. In 1962, the first
Master Plan for Delhi (MPD) was notified.
Large-scale land acquisition by the DDA
was followed by redistribution of the lands
acquired to various "Land-owning
Agencies"(LoA). Integrated development
of the city, with housing for all classes of
people, commercial sites, spaces for street
vending and hawking, industrial establishments
and land for other agencies and
organisations including the railways was
built into the MPD.

# Slums and 'Planned Development'

Slums were, needless to say, not envisioned
in the MPD. Yet, despite the statutory
mandate and powers to effect "planned
development", slums have proliferated.
Why? The answer lies in what is termed
the "implementation backlog". In June
2002, the committee on problems of slums
in Delhi, constituted by the Planning Commission,
recorded in its report that the
DDA is stated to own 25,377.2 hectares of land,
which is 17% of all the land in the
state. A report that the committee relied
on has found that "DDA claims that 20%
of the residential area is earmarked
for EWS/squatter populations under the
integrated development project. DDA has
not allotted any land to slum and _jhuggi_
_jhompri_ department during 1992--97. In
1997--98, DDA allocated 32 acres of land
in Tekhand village ... during 1998--99, about
27.4 acres of land was allocated ..." This
is in a city where, in a population of 14
million people, about three million people
were officially estimated as living in six
lakh _jhuggis_ in about 1,100 _jhuggi_ _jhompri_
clusters.[^/11]

In the 10th Plan document, the Planning
Commission had said: "Urban housing
shortage at the beginning of the 10th Plan
has been assessed to be 8.89 million units.
As much of 90% of the shortfall
pertains to the urban poor, and is attributable
(among other reasons) to ... (non)
provision of housing to slum dwellers".

The cause of the "illegal" occupation of
public lands is, then, directly attributable
to the non-performance of state agencies.
This has resulted in the use of the DD Act 1957
to acquire land and handing over the
land to LoAs, while neglecting the logic
and mandate of the statute in integrated
planned development of the city. While
turning a Nelson's eye on to the state's
breach of statutory duty, a spotlight has
been fixed upon the illegality of the housing
stock that the poor have
created for themselves. Alongside this is
the tolerance of violations of the MPD,
even complicity, when the state sets itself
an agenda and pursues it. In _Delhi
Science Forum vs DDA_,[^/12] for instance, a
scheme to construct an "international
heritage centre, competitive housing"
and such, was inaugurated in 2001 in the
Vasant Kunjarea of Delhi. The MPD clearly
did not allow construction in the area, which
was in a green belt/rural zone, and where
severe groundwater problems existed. The
court invalidated the project, accepting the
contention that the mandatory procedure
for prior land use change had not been
followed by the DDA; but this did not
preclude the resumption of the project once
the defect was rectified. Since then, the
DDA claims to have gone through the
formality of the required procedure and
construction has continued.

The privileging of the Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation (DMRC) has meant that an
endorsement of its plans may be presumed
upon, even when they are widely divergent
from the MPD. The construction of an
"Information Technology Park" at Shastri
Park, on the Yamuna river bed, is on
instance. This, and other "property development"
projects along the metro line, on
land handed over to the DMRC for implementing
the metro project, run against
section 11-A of the DD Act 1957; but
while challenge to such "development" in
one area is pending, the DMRC continues
to deal with the excess property in other
areas unrestrained by the MPD.[^/13] So too
the locating of the Akshardham temple
complex and the Commonwealth Games
village along the banks of the Yamuna,
both of which were, cynically, coincidental
with mass demolition of the houses of
the urban poor, within sighting distance on
the banks of the river in the first half of
the current decade. The governmental
agencies are not prevented from going
through the form of legalising the "change
of user" which can make the illegal, legal.
This is not a route that has been available
to the urban poor.

On November 29, 2002, a division bench
of the Delhi High Court struck out at
"encroachers" and those who had "squatted
and trespassed" on public land.[^/14] It
shot down the resettlement policy of the
state and, in doing so, absolved the
state of its obligation to assist the urban
poor in accessing affordable housing. The
peremptory direction read:

>7. No alternative sites are to be provided
>in future for removal of persons who are
>squatting on public land.
>
>8. Encroachers and squatters on public land
>should be removed expeditiously without
>prerequisite requirement of providing them
>alternative sites before such encroachment
>is removed or cleared.

On the way to issuing these directions,
the court did acknowledge that "it is
undoubtedly the duty of the government
authorities to provide shelter to the underprivileged".
And the state had "admitted
their failure to devise housing schemes for
persons in the economically weaker sections
of the society". Yet, this "lack of
planning and initiative ... cannot be replaced
by an arbitrary system of providing alternative
sites and land to encroachers on
public land". This would "encourage
dishonesty and violation of law".

Impossibility of performance was held
out as another reason for striking down the
resettlement policy. About 7,000 acres of
land had reportedly been acquired by the
DDA between 1990 and 2000, of which 275
acres were utilised for slum-dwellers.
At this rate, it would take 272 years to
resettle those who had been in the site from
before 1998, and the acquisition and
development cost for six lakh plots would
be Rs 4,20,000,00,000, making the proposition
unworkable.

Since (i) many of those resettled transacted
away their land to return to their
original site; (ii) it was taxpayers' monies
that were being used twice over, in
acquiring the land, and, again, while resettling
encroachers; (iii) this placed a premium
on illegality; and (iv) it was slumlords
who had benefited creating illegal
estates, the court decided that the resettlement
policy would have to go.

Squashing the policy, the court closed
with "the hope and desire that it would help
to make Delhi a more liveable place and
ease the problems of the residents of
this town who undoubtedly suffer and
are harassed as a consequence of this
encroachment of public land".

There is an omission that dictates how
illegality is to be perceived: the state's
inaction in relation to EWS housing is
mentioned, only to be relegated to irrelevance.
That land acquired to be used
according to the master plan --- which includes
integrated housing of the EWS ---
has not been so used due to the failure of
governmental agencies has only received
passing mention, and the illegality of such
failure has been glossed over.

# Illegality of Resettlement

Striking down the resettlement policy
would mean not merely that resettlement
would not be a prerequisite for demolition,
but it would actually render resettlement
illegal. On appeal, the Supreme Court has
partially stayed the order, where it permitted
allotments under the resettlement policy
to be made "subject to the result of the
petitions".[^/15] This interim stay has not,
however, altered the course on which the
Delhi High Court has been set. This is in
evidence in the high court order in _Maloy
Krishna Dhar vs GNCTD_.[^/16]

The case was taken to the Delhi High
Court by a resident of a set of apartments
in the trans-Yamuna area in East Delhi. It
concerned three sites housing about 200
_jhuggis_ on DDA land in the vicinity of
housing complexes and a local shopping
centre. The court had been informed that
DDA could only remove the _jhuggi_ clusters
when relocation plots become available.
So, the court directed DDA to "relocate
the _jhuggi_ clusters within a period of two
months and provide alternative sites to the
_jhuggi_ dwellers in accordance with law
and policy". In July 2004, the court chided
the DDA for not having acted, and it
directed the vice-chairman of DDA to
explain the lapse, or be present in court
at the next hearing. The vice-chairman,
DDA, on July 21, 2004, asked for six
months to do what was required of him;
the court, in September 2004, gave him
two months. But, well into 2005, he had
not acted. On September 21, 2005, the
court directed that the vice-chairman should
answer charges of contempt of court for
his inaction. In the process, the court
reiterated the November 29, 2002 logic
against resettlement characterising
the slum dwellers as "unscrupulous
elements" and pitting them against the
"honest citizen (who) has to pay for a piece
of land or flat". Emphasising that "DDA
is a monopolistic organisation dealing with
the land in Delhi", the only "statutory
obligation" that the court found vesting in
the DDA was "to see that nobody should
squat upon the land which has been put at
their disposal in terms of the DD Act 1957".
In consequence, the court directed "the
removal of _jhuggis_ ... within a period of 15
days forthwith. Any assistance required
by the police shall be provided by the
commissioner of police."[^/17]

It is the relocation policy, with the onus
on governmental agencies to find an
alternative site where the urban poor may
be housed, which seems to have been the
hurdle to mass demolition. In striking down
the relocation policy, demolition could be
demanded of governmental authorities, and
the power to punish for contempt more
effectively used. In _Hem Raj vs Commissioner
of Police_,[^/18] a court-appointed committee
had recommended the demolition
of the _jhuggis_ in Nagla Machi. Located at
the T-junction from Pragati Maidan going
towards NOIDA, the "unauthorised occupants"
were reportedly encroaching on
valuable land, had opened commercial
shops, kept "buffaloes and other animals
which not only give way to unhygienic
conditions but also create hindrance to the
smooth flow of commuters on the Ring
Road ...". Four years had passed since the
court's order to remove and report to the
court, and it had not happened yet. "Non-compliance
of directions passed by this
court for the last four years," the court said,
"tantamount to abdication of responsibility
of the authorities apart from wilful disobedience
of the orders resulting in
unauthorised encroachment continuing to
remain where they were." The commissioner
of police, engineer-in-chief of the
PWD, and the special secretary, government
of NCT were all hauled up to answer
charges of contempt.[^/19]

In dealing with the impending demolition
in Nagla Machi, Justices Ruma Pal and
Markandey Katju in the Supreme Court
are reported to have remarked, irately:
"If you are occupying public land, you
have no legal right, what to talk of fundamental
right, to stay there a minute longer."
And: "Nobody forced you to come to
Delhi ... If encroachments on public land
are to be allowed, there will be
anarchy."[^/20] These comments from the
bench are symptomatic of legality supplanting
constitutionality in current discourse.
This has been urged on by a range
of threat perceptions, where the urban
poor are seen as overrunning cities; their
encroachment of public land as bordering
on criminality; the occupation of public
lands as being synonymous with
slumlordism and profiteering; their
numbers as placing an intolerable burden
on infrastructure; and, the impossibility of
their legal existence in cities as providing
a prescription for anarchy.

This has dictated how the fundamental
right to livelihood, to move around and
settle anywhere in the country, and to shelter
and housing has been revised, and reinvented,
and supplanted by one version of
legality. The inefficiencies of governmental
agencies have acquired axiomatic status,
and the statutory power to acquire control
over land in the city has been preserved
while the statutorily mandated duty to
integrate the urban poor into the city and
provide them housing and livelihood has
been shelved, in the interests of pragmatism.

In cleaning up the city through a strict
enforcement of legality, the court has also
been ordering the bringing down of
unauthorised structures, or parts of structures,
on pain of contempt. The relative
political clout of those whose buildings
and activities are facing demolition is seen
in the way the Delhi Laws (Special Provisions)
Act 2006, coming into effect in
May 2006, has been constructed. There is
a moratorium of one year on demolition
of unauthorised structures, "whether in
pursuance of court orders or otherwise",
because it "is causing avoidable hardship
and irreparable loss to a large number of
people", But, while removal of slums and
_jhuggi_ _jhompri_ dwellers and hawkers and
street vendors are also covered by the
moratorium, the central government may
order their removal where "clearance of
land is required for specific public projects".
And, the "central government may, from
time to time, issue such directions to the
local authorities as it may deem fit, for
giving effect to the provisions of this act
and it shall be the duty of the local authorities
to comply with such directions". This
is despite the acknowledgement that a
policy on relocation and rehabilitation of
slum-dwellers in Delhi is still "under the
consideration of the central government".
The power to demolish, separated from the
obligation to ensure housing for the urban
poor, is preserved in this law.

This narrow construction of legality, and
the inversion of constitutionalism, has to
be urgently challenged.[^/21]


[^/1]: For how a slum is defined in law, different from
it commonly attributed meaning, see, Usha
Ramanathan, 'The Demolition Drive', _EPW_, 2005.

[^/2]: _Olga Tellis vs Bombay Municipal Corporation_
(1985), 3 SCC, p. 545.

[^/3]: _K Chandru vs State of Tamil Nadu_ (1985), 3
SCC, 536 at 541.

[^/4]: _SP Gupta vs Union of India_ 1981, Supp SCC, 87 at 210.

[^/5]: For extracts from the Interim Report II of the
Shah Commission of Inquiry, see, 'Shah
Commission's Findings - V: The Wrecking of
Delhi' in _Economic and Political Weekly_,
June 24, 1978, pp. 1019--21.

[^/6]: 138th Report of the Law Commission on
'Legislative Protection for Slum and Pavement
Dwellers', 1990.

[^/7]: CW No 267 and CM 464 of 1993, Delhi High
Court.

[^/8]: \(2000) 2 SCC 679.

[^/9]: \(1996) 4 SCC 750.

[^/10]: \(1996) 2 SCC 594.

[^/11]: Affidavit filed in the Supreme Court by the
Deputy Commissioner, Slum and J J Department,
Municipal Corporation of Delhi in the matter
of _Almitra H Patel vs Union of India_ WP (C) 888 of 1996, August 2, 2000, p. 4.

[^/12]: 2004 (112), _Delhi Law Times (DLT)_ in the
Delhi High Court.

[^/13]: _Gita Diwan Verma vs DMRC_ WP (C) 6,500
of 2005, Delhi High Court.

[^/14]: _Okhla Factory Owners' Association vs GNCTD_ 2003 (108) DLT 517, Delhi High Court.

[^/15]: Interim order dated March 3, 2003 in SLP (C),
3166--67 of 2003 and SLP(C),6313--14 of 2003
in the Union of India and NCT's appeal in the
Supreme Court against the high court order
dated November 29, 2002.

[^/16]: WP 6160 of 2003, September 21, 2005, Delhi
High Court.

[^/17]: Also, _Navniti CGHS vs Lt Governor_ WP (C) 5697 of 2002, August 16, 2004, Delhi High
Court.

[^/18]: WP (C) 3419 of 1999, December 14, 2005,
Delhi High Court.

[^/19]: _Ram Rattan vs Commissioner of Police_ CC 3732 of 2006, dated May 9, 2006 (Supreme
Court). _See also_, _Sajha Manch vs Union of
India_ CWP 241 of 2006, May 12, 2006.

[^/20]: Dhananjay Mahapatra, 'SC: Encroachers Have
No Right over Public Land: Court Rules Poverty
Cannot be an Excuse for Squatting', _Times of
India_, Delhi edition, May 10, 2006.

[^/21]: This law has been challenged in the Supreme
Court. The Nagla Machi demonstrations have
been stayed till the next date of hearing of the
challenge to the law: Siddarth Narrain, "Four
Weeks' Stay on Slum Demolitions", _The Hindu_,
New Delhi, June 23, 2006, p. 3.
