# ABSTRACT

Long lived transactions (LLTs) hold on to database resources for
relatively long periods of time, significantly delaying the termination of
shorter and more common transactions. To alleviate these problems we
propose the notion of a saga. A LLT is a saga if it can be written as a
sequence of transactions that can be interleaved with other transactions.
The database management system guarantees that either all the transactions
in a saga are successfully completed or compensating transactions
are run to amend a partial execution. Both the concept of saga
and its implementation are relatively simple, but they have the potential
to improve performance significantly. We analyze the various implementation
issues related to sagas, including how they can be run on an existing
system that does not directly support them. We also discuss techniques
for database and LLT design that make it feasible to break up
LLTs into sagas.

# INTRODUCTION

As its name indicates, a _long lived transaction_ is a transaction whose execution,
even without interference from other transactions, takes a substantial amount of time,
possibly on the order of hours or days. A long lived transaction, or LLT, has a long
duration compared to the majority of other transactions either because it accesses
many database objects, it has lengthy computations, it pauses for inputs from the users,
or a combination of these factors. Examples of LLTs are transactions to produce
monthly account statements at a bank, transactions to process claims at an insurance
company, and transactions to collect statistics over an entire database \[Gray81a\].

In most cases, LLTs present serious performance problems. Since they are transactions,
the system must execute them as atomic actions, thus preserving the consistency
of the database \[Date81a, Ullm82a\]. To make a transaction atomic, the system
usually locks the objects accessed by the transaction until it commits, and this typically
occurs at the end of the transaction. As a consequence, other transactions wishing
to access the LLT's objects are delayed for a substantial amount of time.

Furthermore, the transaction abort rate can also be increased by LLTs. As discussed
in \[Gray81b\], the frequency of deadlock is very sensitive to the "size" of transactions,
that is, to how many objects transactions access. (In the analysis of \[Gray81b\]
the deadlock frequency grows with the fourth power of the transaction size.) Hence,
since LLTs access many objects, they may cause many deadlocks, and correspondingly,
many abortions. From the point of view of system crashes, LLTs have a higher probability
of encountering a failure (because of their duration), and are thus more likely to
encounter yet more delays and more likely to be aborted themselves.

In general there is no solution that eliminates the problems of LLTs. Even if we
use a mechanism different from locking to ensure atomicity of the LLTs, the long delays
and/or the high abort rate will remain: No matter how the mechanism operates, a
transaction that needs to access the objects that were accessed by a LLT cannot
commit until the LLT commits.

However, for _specific applications_ it may be possible to alleviate the problems by
relaxing the requirement that an LLT be executed as an atomic action. In other words,
without sacrificing the consistency of the database, it may be possible for certain LLTs
to release their resources before they complete, thus permitting other waiting transactions
to proceed.

To illustrate this idea, consider an airline reservation application. The database
(or actually a collection of databases from different airlines) contains reservations for
flights, and a transaction _T_ wishes to make a number of reservations. For this discussion,
let us assume that _T_ is a LLT (say it pauses for customer input after each reservation).
In this application it may not be necessary for _T_ to hold on to all of its resources
until it completes. For instance, after _T_ reserves a seat on flight _F~1~_, it could immediately
allow other transactions to reserve seats on the same flight. In other words, we
can view _T_ as a collection of "sub-transactions" _T~1~_, _T~2~_, ... , _T~n~_ that reserve the individual
seats.

However, we do not wish to submit _T_ to the database management system
(DBMS) simply as a collection of independent transactions because we still want _T_ to be
a unit that is either successfully completed or not done at all. We would not be
satisfied with a DBMS that would allow _T_ to reserve three out of five seats and then
(due to a crash) do nothing more. On the other hand, we would be satisfied with a
DBMS that guaranteed that _T_ would make all of its reservations, or would cancel any
reservations made if _T_ had to be suspended.

This example shows that a control mechanism that is less rigid than the conventional
atomic-transaction ones but still offers some guarantees regarding the execution
of the components of an LLT would be useful. In this paper we will present such a
mechanism.

Let us use the term _saga_ to refer to a LLT that can be broken up into a collection
of sub-transactions that can be interleaved in any way with other transactions. Each
sub-transaction in this case is a real transaction in the sense that it preserves database
consistency. However, unlike other transactions, the transactions in a saga are related
to each other and should be executed as a (non-atomic) unit: any partial executions of
the saga are undesirable, and if they occur, must be compensated for.

To amend partial executions, each saga transaction _T~i~_ should be provided with a
compensating transaction _C~i~_. The compensating transaction undoes, from a semantic
point of view, any of the actions performed by _T~i~_, but does not necessarily return the
database to the state that existed when the execution of _T~i~_ began. In our airline example,
if _T~i~_ reserves a seat on a flight, then _C~i~_ can cancel the reservation (say by subtracting
one from the number of reservations and performing some other checks). But _C~i~_
cannot simply store in the database the number of seats that existed when _T~i~_ ran
because other transactions could have run between the time _T~i~_ reserved the seat and _C~i~_
canceled the reservation, and could have changed the number of reservations for this
flight.

Once compensating transactions _C~1~, C~2~, ... C~n-1~_ are defined for saga _T~1~, T~2~, ... , T~n~_,
then the system can make the following guarantee. Either the sequence

\

_T~1~, T~2~, ... , T~n~_

\

(which is the preferable one) or the sequence

\

_T~1~, T~2~, ... , T~j~, C~j~, C~2~, C~1~_

\

for some _0 <= j < n_ will be executed.

Sagas appear to be a relatively common type of LLT. They occur when a LLT
consists of a sequence of relatively independent steps, where each step does not have to
observe the _same_ consistent database state. For instance, in a bank it is common to
perform a fixed operation (_e.g._, compute interest) on all accounts, and there is very little
interaction between the computations for one account and the next. In an office
information system, it is also common to have LLTs with independent steps that can be
interleaved with those of other transactions. For example, receiving a purchase order
involves entering the information into the database, updating the inventory, notifying
accounting, printing a shipping order, and so on. Such office LLTs mimic real procedures
and hence can cope with interleaved transactions. In reality, one does not physically
lock the warehouse until a purchase order is fully processed. Thus there is no
need for the computerized procedures to lock out the inventory database until they
complete.

Once again, the bank and office LLTs we have presented are not just collections of
normal transactions, they are sagas. There is an application "constraint" (not
representable by the database consistency constraints) that the steps of these activities
should not be left unfinished. The applications demand that all accounts be processed
or that the purchase order is fully processed. If the purchase order is not successfully
completed, then the records must be straightened (_e.g._, inventory should not reflect the
departure of the item). In the bank example, it may always be possible to move forward
and finish the LLT. In this case, it may not be necessary to ever compensate for
an unfinished LLT.

Note that the notion of a saga is related to that of a nested
transaction \[Mossa, Lync83a\]. However, there are two important differences:

(a) A saga only permits two levels of nesting: the top level saga and simple transactions,
and
(b) At the outer level full atomicity is not provided. That is, sagas may view the partial
results of other sagas.

Sagas can also be viewed as special types of transactions running under the mechanisms
described in \[Garc83a, Lync83a\]. The restrictions we have placed on the more general
mechanisms make it much simpler to implement (and understand) sagas, in consequence
making it more likely that they be used in practice.

Two ingredients are necessary to make the ideas we have presented feasible: a
DBMS that supports sagas, and LLTs that are broken into sequences of transactions.
In the rest of this paper we study these ingredients in more detail. In Sections 2
through 7 we study the implementation of a saga processing mechanism. We start by
discussing how an application programmer can define sagas, and then how the system
can support them. We initially assume that compensating transactions can only
encounter system failures. Later on, in Section 6, we study the effects of other failures
(_e.g._ program bugs) in compensating transactions.

In Sections 8 and 9 we address the design of LLTs. We first show that our model
of sequential transaction execution for a saga can be generalized to include parallel
transaction execution and hence a wider range of LLTs. Then we discuss some strategies
that an application programmer may follow in order to write LLTs that are
indeed sagas and can take advantage of our proposed mechanism.

# 2. USER FACILITIES

From the point of view of an application programmer, a mechanism is required for
informing the system of the beginning and end of a saga, the beginning and end of each
transaction, and the compensating transactions. This mechanism could be similar to
the one used in conventional systems to manage transactions \[Gray78a\].

In particular, when an application program wishes to initiate a saga it issues a
_begin-saga_ command to the system. This is followed by a series of _begin-transaction_,
_end-transaction_ commands that indicate the boundaries of each transaction. In between
these commands the application program would issue conventional database access
commands. From within a transaction, the program can optionally start a userinitiated
abort by issuing an _abort-transaction_ command. This terminates the current
transaction, but not the saga. Similarly, there is an _abort-saga_ command to abort first
the currently executing transaction and second the entire saga (by running compensating
transactions). Finally, there is an _end-saga_ command to commit the currently executing
transaction (if any) and to complete the saga.

Most of these commands will include various parameters. The _begin-saga_ command
can return a saga identifier to the program. This identifier can then be passed to
the system on subsequent calls made by the saga. An _abort-transaction_ command will
include as a parameter the address where saga execution is to continue after the abortion.
Each _end-transaction_ call includes the identification of the compensating transaction
that must be executed in case the currently ending transaction must be rolled
back. The identification includes the name and entry point of the compensating program,
plus any parameters that the compensating transaction may need. (We assume
that each compensating program includes its own _begin-transaction_ and _end-transaction_
calls. _Abort-transaction_ and _abort-saga_ commands are not allowed within
a compensating transaction.) Finally, the _abort-saga_ command may include as a
parameter a _save-point identifier_, as described below.

Note that it is possible to have each transaction store in the database the parameters
that its compensating transaction may need in the future. In this case, the
parameters do not have to be passed by the system; they can be read by the compensating
transaction when it starts. Also note that if an _end-saga_ command ends both
the last transaction and the saga, there is no need to have a compensating transaction
for the last transaction. If instead a separate _end-transaction_ is used, then it will have
to include the identification of a compensating transaction.

In some cases it may be desirable to let the application programmer indicate
through the _save-point_ command where _saga check points_ should be taken. This command
can be issued between transactions. It forces the system to save the state of the
running application program and returns a _save-point identifier_ for future reference.
The save points could then be useful in reducing the amount of work after a saga
failure or a system crash: instead of compensating for all of the outstanding transactions,
the system could compensate for transactions executed since the last save point,
and then restart the saga.

Of course, this means that we can now have executions of the type _T~1~, T~2~, C~2~, T~2~, T~3~, T~4~, T~5~, C~5~, C~4~, T~4~, T~5~, T~6~_. (After successfully executing _T~2~_ the first time, the system
crashed. A _save-point_ had been taken after _T~1~_, but to restart here, the system first
undoes _T~2~_ by running _C~2~_. Then the saga can be restarted and _T~2~_ reexecuted. A second
failure occurred after the execution of _T~5~_.) This means that our definition of valid
execution sequences given above must be modified to include such sequences. If these
partial recovery sequences are not valid, then the system should either _not_ take savepoints,
or it should take them automatically at the beginning (or end) of every transaction.

The model we have described up to now is the quite general, but in some cases it
may be easier to have a more restrictive one. We will discuss such a restrictive model
later on in Section 5.

# 3. SAVING CODE RELIABLY

In a conventional transaction processing system, application code is not needed to
restore the database to a consistent state after a crash. If a failure destroys the code
of a running transaction, the system logs contains enough information to undo the
effects of the transaction. In a saga processing system, the situation is different. To
complete a running saga after a crash it is necessary to either complete the missing
transactions or to run compensating transactions to abort the saga. In either case it is
essential to have the required application code.

There are various possible solutions to this problem. One is to handle application
code as system code is handled in conventional systems. Note that even though a conventional
DBMS need not save _application_ code reliably, it must save system code.
That is, a conventional DBMS cannot restart if failure destroys the code required to
run the system. Thus, conventional systems have manual or automatic procedures, outside
the DBMS itself, for updating and storing backup copies of the system.

In a saga processing system we could then require that application code for sagas
be defined and updated in the same fashion. Each new version of a program created
would be stored in the current system area, as well as in one or more backup areas.
Since the updates would not be under the control of the DBMS, they would not be
atomic operations and would probably require manual intervention in case a crash
occurs during the update. When a saga starts running, it would assume that all its
transactions and compensating transactions have been predefined, and it would simply
make the appropriate calls.

Such an approach may be acceptable if sagas are written by trusted application
programmers and not updated frequently. If this is not the case, it may be best to handle
saga code as part of the database. If saga code is simply stored as one or more
database objects, then its recovery would be automatic. The only drawback is that the
DBMS must be able to handle large objects, i.e., the code. Some systems would not be
able to do this, because their data model does not permit large "unstructured" objects,
the buffer manager cannot manage objects that span more than one buffer, or some
other reason.

If the DBMS can manage code, then reliable code storage for sagas becomes quite
simple. The first transaction of the saga, _T~1~_, enters into the database _all_ further transactions
(compensating or not) that may be needed in the future. When _T~1~_ commits,
the rest of the saga is ready to start. The compensating transaction for _T~1~_, _C~1~_ would
simply remove these objects from the database. It is also possible to define transactions
incrementally. For example, a compensating transaction _C~i~_ need not be entered into
the database until its corresponding transaction _T~i~_; is ready to commit. This approach
is slightly more complicated but saves unnecessary database operations.

# 4. BACKWARD RECOVERY

When a failure interrupts a saga, there are two choices: compensate for the executed
transactions, _backward recovery_, or execute the missing transactions, _forward
recovery_. (Of course, forward recovery may not be an option in all situations.) For
_backward recovery_ the system needs _compensating transactions_, for _forward recovery_ it
needs _save-points_. In this section we will describe how pure _backward recovery_ can be
implemented, the next will discuss mixed backward/forward and pure forward recovery.

Within the DBMS, a _saga execution component_ (SEC) manages sagas. This component
calls on the conventional _transaction execution component_ (TEC), which manages
the execution of the individual transactions. The operation of the SEC is similar to
that of the TEC: the SEC executes a series of transactions as a unit, while the TEC
executes a series of actions as an (atomic) unit. Both components require a log to
record the activities of sagas and transactions. As a matter of fact, it is convenient to
merge both logs into a single one, and we will assume that this is the case here. We
will also assume that the log is duplexed for reliability. Note that the SEC needs no
concurrency control because the transactions it controls can be interleaved with other
transactions.

All saga commands and database actions are channeled through the SEC. Each
saga command (_e.g._, _begin-saga_) is recorded in the log before any action is taken. Any
parameters contained in the commands (_e.g._, the compensating transaction
identification in an _end-transaction_ command) are also recorded in the log. The _begin-transaction_
and _end-transaction_ commands, as well as all database actions, are forwarded
to the TEC, which handles them in a conventional way \[Gray78a\].

When the SEC receives an _abort-saga_ command it initiates _backward recovery_.
To illustrate, let us consider a saga that has executed transactions _T~1~_ and _T~2~_, and that
halfway through the execution of _T~3~_ issues an _abort-saga_ command to the SEC. The
SEC records the command in the log (to protect against a crash during roll back) and
then instructs the TEC to abort the current transaction _T~3~_. This transaction is rolled
back using conventional techniques, _e.g._, by storing the "before" values (found in the
log) back into the database.

Next the SEC consults the log and orders the execution of compensating transactions
_C~2~_ and _C~1~_. If the parameters for these transactions are in the log, they are
extracted and passed in the call. The two transactions are executed just like other
transactions, and of course, the information as to when they begin and commit is
recorded in the log by the TEC. (If there is a crash during this time, the system will
then be able to know what work remains to be done.) When _C~1~_ commits, the saga terminates.
An entry is made in the log, similar to the one created by the _end-saga_ command.

The log is also used to recover from crashes. After a crash, the TEC is first
invoked to clean up pending transactions. Once all transactions are either aborted or
committed, the SEC evaluates the status of each saga. If a saga has corresponding
_begin-saga_ and _end-saga_ entries in the log, then the saga completed and no further
action is necessary. If there is a missing _end-saga_ entry, then the saga is aborted. By
scanning the log the SEC discovers the identity of the last successfully executed and
uncompensated transaction. Compensating transactions are run for this transaction
and all preceeding ones.

# 5. FORWARD RECOVERY

For forward recovery, the SEC requires a reliable copy of the code for all missing
transactions plus a _save-point_. The save point to be used may be specified by the application
or by the system, depending on which aborted the saga. (Recall that a _save-point
identifier_ can be included as a parameter to the _abort-saga_ command.) In the
case of a system crash, the recovery component can specify the most recent save point
for each active saga.

To illustrate the operation of the SEC in this case, consider a saga that executes
transactions _T~1~_, _T~2~_, a _save-point_ command, and transaction _T~3~_. Then during the execution
of transaction _T~4~_ the system crashes. Upon recovery, the system must first perform
a _backward recovery_ to the _save-point_ (aborting _T~4~_ and running _C~3~_). After ensuring
that the code for running _T~3~_, _T~4~_, ... is available, the SEC records in the log it
decision to restart and restarts the saga. We call this backward/forward recovery.

As mentioned in Section 2, if _save-points_ are automatically taken at the beginning
of every transaction, then pure forward recovery is feasible. If we in addition prohibit
the use of _abort-saga_ commands, then it becomes unnecessary to ever perform backward
recovery.[^/1] (_Abort-transaction_ commands would still be acceptable.) This has the
advantage of eliminating the need for compensating transactions, which may be difficult
to write in some applications (see Section 9).

In this case the SEC becomes a simple "persistent" transaction executor, similar
to persistent message transmission mechanisms \[Hamm80a\]. After every crash, for
every active saga, the SEC instructs the TEC to abort the last executing transaction,
and then restarts the saga at the point where this transaction had started.

We can simplify this further if we simply view a saga as a file containing a
sequence of calls to individual transaction programs. Here there is no need for explicit
begin or end saga nor begin or end transaction commands. The saga begins with the
first call in the file and ends with the last one. Furthermore, each call is a transaction.
The state of a running saga is simply the number of the transaction that is executing.
This means that the system can take _save-points_ after each transaction with very little
cost.

Such pure forward recovery methods would be useful for simple LLTs that always
succeed. The LLT that computes interest payments for back accounts may be an
example of such a LLT. The interest computation on an individual account may fail
(through an _abort-transaction_ command), but the rest of the computations would
proceed unaffected.

Using operating systems terminology, the transaction file model described above
could be called a simple EXEC or SCRIPT. The idea of a persistent SCRIPT would
also be useful in an operating system to ensure that a collection of commands were successfully
executed (assuming that each command executed as a transaction). For example,
a typical text processing and printing job consists of several steps (_e.g._, in UNIX,
equation processing, troffing, printing). Each step produces one or more files that are
used by the following steps. A persistent SCRIPT would allow a user to start a long
text processing job and go home, confident that the system would complete it.

[^/1]: In this case we must also assume that every sub-transaction in the saga will eventually succeed if it
is retried enough times.

# 6. OTHER ERRORS

Up to this point we have assumed that the user-provided code in compensating
transactions does not have bugs. But what happens if a compensating transaction cannot
be successfully completed due to errors (_e.g._, it tries to read a file that does not
exist, or there is a bug in the code)? The transaction could be aborted, but if it were
run again it would probably encounter the same error. In this case, the system is stuck:
it cannot abort the transaction nor can it complete it. A similar situation occurs if in a
pure forward scenario a transaction has an error.

One possible solution is to make use of software fault tolerant techniques along the
lines of recovery blocks \[Ande81a, Horn74a\]. A recovery block is an alternate or secondary
block of code that is provided in case a failure is detected in the primary block. If
a failure is detected the system is reset to its pre-primary state and the secondary
block is executed. The secondary block is designed to achieve the same end as the primary
using a different algorithm or technique, hopefully avoiding the primary's failure.

The recovery block idea translates very easily into the framework of sagas. Transactions
are natural program blocks, and rollback capability for failed transactions is
provided by the TEC. The saga application can control recovery block execution. After
it aborts a transaction (or is notified that its transaction has been aborted), the application
either aborts the saga, tries an alternative transaction, or retries the primary.
Note that compensating transactions can be given alternates as well to make aborting
sagas more reliable.

The other possible solution to this problem is manual intervention. The erroneous
transaction is first aborted. Then it is given to an application programmer who, given
a description of the error, can correct it. The SEC (or the application) then reruns the
transaction and continues processing the saga.

Fortunately, while the transaction is being manually repaired the saga does _not_
hold any database resources (i.e., locks). Hence, the fact that an already long saga will
take even longer will not significantly affect performance of other transactions.

Relying on manual intervention is definitely not an elegant solution, but it is a
practical one. The remaining alternative is to run the saga as a long transaction.
When this LLT encounters an error it will be aborted in its entirety, potentially wasting
much more effort. Furthermore, the bug will still have to be corrected manually
and the LLT resubmitted. The only advantage is that during the repair, the LLT will
be unknown to the system. In the case of a saga, saga will continue to be pending in
the system until the repaired transaction is installed.

# 7. IMPLEMENTING SAGAS ON TOP OF AN EXISTING DBMS

In our discussion of saga management we have assumed that the SEC is part of
the DBMS and has direct access to the log. However, in some cases it may be desirable
to run sagas on an existing DBMS that does not directly support them. This is possible
as long as the database can store large unstructured objects (i.e., code and _save-points_).
However, it involves giving the application programmer more responsibilities and possibly
hurting performance.

There are basically two things to do. First, the saga commands embedded in the
application code become subroutine calls (as opposed to system calls). (The subroutines
are loaded together with the application code.) Each subroutine stores within the database
all the information that the SEC would have stored in the log. For example, the
_begin-saga_ subroutine would enter an identification for the saga in a database table of
active sagas. The _save-point_ subroutine would cause the application to save its state
(or a key portion of its state) in a similar database table. Similarly, the _end-transaction_
subroutine enters into some other table(s), the identification of the ending
transaction and its compensating transaction before executing an _end-transaction_ system
call (to be processed by the TEC).

The commands to store saga information (except _save-point_) in the database must
always be performed within a transaction, else the information may be lost in a crash.
Thus, the saga subroutines must keep track of whether the saga is currently executing
a transaction or not. This can easily be achieved if the begin-transaction subroutine
sets a flag that is reset by the _end-transaction_ one. All database storage actions would
be disallowed if the flag is not set. Note that the subroutine approach only works if the
application code never makes system calls on its own. For instance, if a transaction is
terminated by an _end-transaction_ system call (and not a subroutine call), then the compensating
information will not be recorded and the transaction flag will not be reset.

Second, a special process must exist to implement the rest of the SEC functions.
This process, the _saga daemon_ (SD) would always be active. It would be restarted after
a crash by the operating system. After a crash it would scan the saga tables to discover
the status of pending sagas. This scan would be performed by submitting a database
transaction. The TEC will only execute this transaction after transaction
recovery is complete; hence the SD will read consistent data. Once the SD knows the
status of the pending sagas, it issues the necessary compensating or normal transactions,
just as the SEC would have after recovery. Care must be taken not to interfere
with sagas that started right after the crash, but before the SD submitted its database
query.

After the TEC aborts a transaction (_e.g._, because of a deadlock or a user initiated
abort), it may simply kill the process that initiated the transaction. In a conventional
system this may be fine, but with sagas this leaves the saga unfinished. If the TEC cannot
signal the SD when this occurs, then the SD will have to periodically scan the saga
table searching for such a situation. If found, the corrective action is immediately
taken.

A running saga can also directly request services from the SD. For instance, to
perform an _abort-saga_, the _abort-saga_ subroutine sends the request to the SD and then
(if necessary) executes an _abort-transaction_.

# 8. PARALLEL SAGAS

Our model for sequential transaction execution within a saga can be extended to
include parallel transactions. This could be useful in an application where the transactions
of a saga are naturally executed concurrently. For example, when processing a
purchase order, it may be best to generate the shipping order and update accounts
receivable at the same time.

We will assume that a saga process (the parent) can create new processes (children)
with which it will run in parallel, with a request similar to a fork request in
UNIX. The system may also provide a join capability to combine processes within a
saga.

Backward crash recovery for parallel sagas is similar to that for sequential sagas.
Within each process of the parallel saga, transactions are compensated for (or undone)
in reverse order just as with sequential sagas. In addition, all compensations in a child
process must occur before any compensations for transactions in the parent that were
executed before the child was created (forked). (Note that only transaction execution
order _within a process_ and fork and join information constrain the order of compensation.
If _T~1~_ and _T~2~_ have executed in parallel processes and _T~2~_ has read data written by
_T~1~_, compensating for _T~1~_ does not force us to compensate for _T~2~_ first.)

Unlike backward crash recovery, _backward recovery_ from a saga failure is more
complicated with parallel sagas because the saga may consist of several processes, all of
which must be terminated. For this, it is convenient to route all process fork and join
operations through the SEC so it can keep track of the process structure of the saga.
When one of the saga processes requests an _abort-saga_, the SEC kills all processes
involved in the saga. It then aborts all pending transactions and compensates all committed
ones.

Forward recovery is even more complicated due to the possibility of "inconsistent"
_save-points_. To illustrate, consider the saga of Figure 8.1. Each box represents a process;
within each box is the sequence of transactions and _save-points_ (sp) executed by
the process. The lower process was forked after _T~1~_ committed. Suppose that _T~3~_ and _T~5~_
are the currently executing transactions and that _save-points_ were executed before
_T~1~_ and _T~5~_.

\pagebreak

```
+----------------------------------------+
|                                        |
|   T0 ---> sp ---> T1 ---> T2 ---> T3   |
|                    |                   |
+--------------------+-------------------+
                     |
                     |   +-----------------------+
                     |   |                       |
                     +-->|  T4 ---> sp ---> T5   |
                         |                       |
                         +-----------------------+
```

At this point the system fails. The top process will have to be restarted before _T~1~_.
Therefore, the _save-point_ made by the second process is not useful. It depends on the
execution of _T~1~_ which is being compensated for.

This problem is known as cascading roll backs. It problem has been analyzed in a
scenario where processes communicate via messages \[Rand78a\]. There it is possible to
analyze _save-point_ dependencies to arrive at a consistent set of _save-points_ (if it exists).
The consistent set can then be used to restart the processes. With parallel sagas, the
situation is even simpler since _save-point_ dependencies arise only through forks and
joins, and transaction and _save-point_ order within a process.

To arrive at a consistent set of _save-points_, the SEC must again be informed of
process forking and joining. The information must be stored on the log and analyzed at
recovery time. The SEC chooses the latest _save-point_ within each process of the saga
such that no earlier transaction has been compensated for. (A transaction is earlier
than a _save-point_ if it would have to be compensated for after a transaction that had
executed in place of that _save-point_). If there is no such _save-point_ in a process, that
entire process must be rolled back. For those processes with _save-points_, the necessary
backward recoveries can be conducted and the processes restarted.

# 9. DESIGNING SAGAS

The saga processing mechanisms we have described will only be of use if application
programmers write their LLTs as sagas. Thus the following questions immediately
arise: How can a programmer know if a given LLT can be safely broken up into a
sequence of transactions? How does the programmer select the break points? How
difficult is it to write compensating transactions? In this section we will address some
of these issues.

To identify potential sub-transactions within a LLT, one must search for natural
divisions of the work being performed. In many cases, the LLT models a series of real
world actions, and each of these actions is a candidate for a saga transaction. For
example, when a university student graduates, several actions must be performed before
his or her diploma can be issued: the library must check that no book are out, the controller
must check that all housing bills and tuition bills are checked; the students new
address must be recorded; and so on. Clearly, each of these real world actions can be
modeled by a transaction.

In other cases, it is the database itself that is naturally partitioned into relatively
independent components, and the actions on each component can be grouped into a
saga transaction. For example, consider the source code for a large operating system.
Usually the operating system and its programs can be divided into components like the
scheduler, the memory manager, the interrupt handlers, etc. A LLT to add a tracing
facility to the operating system can be broken up so that each transaction adds the
tracing code to one of the components. Similarly, if the data on employees can be split
by plant location, then a LLT to give a cost-of-living raise to all employees can be broken
up by plant location.

Designing compensating transactions for LLTs is a difficult problem _in general_.
(For instance, if a transaction fires a missile, it may not be possible to undo this action.)
However, for many practical applications it may be as simple (or difficult) as writing
the transactions themselves. In fact, Gray notes in \[Gray81a\] that, transactions often
have corresponding compensating transactions within the application transaction set.
This is especially true when the transaction models a real world action that can be
undone, like reserving a rental car or issuing a shipping order. In such cases, writing
either a compensating or a normal transaction is very similar: the programmer must
write code that performs the action and preserves the database consistency constraints.

It may even be possible to compensate for actions that are harder to undo, like
sending a letter or printing a check. For example, to compensate for the letter, send a
second letter explaining the problem. To compensate for the check, send a stoppayment
message to the bank. Of course, it would be desirable not to have to compensate
for such actions. However, the price of running LLTs as regular transactions may
be so high that one is forced to write sagas and their compensating transactions.

Also recall that pure forward recovery does not require compensating transactions
(see Section 5). So if compensating transactions are hard to write, then one has the
choice of tailoring the application so that LLTs do not have user initiated aborts.
Without these aborts, pure forward recovery is feasible and compensation is never
needed.

As has become clear from our discussion, the structure of the database plays an
important role in the design of sagas. Thus, it is best not to study each LLT in isolation,
but to design the entire database with LLTs and sagas in mind. That is, if the
database can be laid out into a set of loosely-coupled components (with few and simple
inter-component consistency constraints), then it is likely that the LLT will naturally
break up into sub-transactions that can be interleaved.

Another technique that could be useful for converting LLTs into sagas involves
storing the temporary data of an LLT in the database itself. To illustrate, consider a
LLT _L_ with three sub-transactions _T~1~_, _T~2~_, and _T~3~_. In _T~1~_, _L_ performs some actions and
then withdraws a certain amount of money from an account stored in the database.
This amount is stored in a temporary, local variable until during _T~3~_ the funds are
placed in some other account(s). After _T~1~_ completes, the database is left in an inconsistent
state because some money is "missing," i.e., it cannot be found in the database.
Therefore, _L_ cannot be run as a saga. If it were, a transaction that needed to see all
the money (say an audit transaction) could run sometime between _T~1~_ and _T~3~_ and would
not find all the funds. If _L_ is run as a regular transaction, then the audit is delayed
until _L_ completes. This guarantees consistency but hurts performance.

However, if instead of storing the missing money in local storage _L_ stores it in the
database, then the database would be consistent, and other transactions could be interleaved.
To achieve this we must incorporate into the database schema the "temporary"
storage (_e.g._, we add a relation for funds in transit or for pending insurance
claims). Also, transactions that need to see all the money must be aware of this new
storage. Hence it is best if this storage is defined when the database is first designed
and not added as an afterthought.

Even if _L_ had no _T~2~_ transaction, writing the missing funds in the database may be
convenient. Notice that in this case _L_ would release the locks on the temporary storage
after _T~1~_, only to immediately request them again in _T~3~_. This may add some overhead
to _L_, but in return for this transactions that are waiting to see the funds will be able to
proceed sooner, after _T~1~_. This is analogous to having a person with a huge photocopying
job periodically step aside and let shorter jobs through. For this the coveted resources,
i.e., the coping machine or the funds, must be temporarily released.

We believe that what we have stated in terms of money and LLT _L_ holds in general.
The database and the LLTs should be designed so that data passed from one
sub-transaction to the next via local storage is minimized. This technique, together
with a well structured database, can make it possible to write LLT's as sagas.

# 10. CONCLUSIONS

We have presented the notion of saga, a long lived transaction that can be broken
up into transactions, but still executed as a unit. Both the concept and its implementation
are relatively simple, but in its simplicity lies its usefulness. We believe that a
saga processing mechanism can be implemented with relatively little effort, either as
part of the DBMS or as an added-on facility. The mechanism can then be used by the
large number of LLTs that are sagas to improve performance significantly.

# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Bruce Lindsay provided several useful suggestions, including the name "saga."
Rafael Alonso and Ricardo Cordon also contributed a number of ideas.

This research was supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
of the Department of Defense and by the Office of Naval Research under Contracts
Nos. N00014--85-C-0456 and N00014--85-K-0465, and by the National Science Foundation
under Cooperative Agreement No. DCR-8420948. The views and conclusions contained
in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the Defense Advanced
Research Projects Agency or the U.S. Government.

# REFERENCES

::: {#refs}

Ande81a.

: Anderson, T. and P. A. Lee, _Fault Tolerance, Principles and Practice_, Prentice-Hall
International, London, 1981.

Date81a.

: Date, C. J., _An Introduction to Database Systems, (3rd Edition)_, Addison-Wesley,
Reading, MA, 1981.

Garc83a.

: Garcia-Molina, Hector, "Using Semantic Knowledge for Transaction Processing in
a Distributed Database," _ACM Transactions on Database Systems_, vol. 8, no. 2, pp.
186--213, June 1983.

Gray78a.

: Gray, Jim, "Notes on Data Base Operating Systems," in _Operating Systems: An
Advanced Course_, ed. G. Seegmuller, pp. 393--481, Springer-Verlag, 1978.

Gray81a.

: Gray, Jim, "The Transaction Concept: Virtues and Limitations," _Proceedings of
the Seventh Int'l. Conference on Very Large Databases_, pp. 144--154, IEEE, Cannes,
France, Sept., 1981.

Gray81b.

: Gray, Jim, Pete Homan, Ron Obermarck, and Hank Korth, "A Straw Man
Analysis of Probability of Waiting and Deadlock," IBM Research Report RJ3066
(38112), IBM Research Laboratory, San Jose, California, Feb., 1981.

Hamm80a.

: Hammer, Michael and David Shipman, "Reliability Mechanisms for SDD-1: A System for Distributed Databases," _ACM Transactions on Database Systems_, vol. 5,
pp. 431--466, December, 1980.

Horn74a.

: Horning, J. J., H. C. Lauer, P. M. Melliar-Smith, and B. Randell, "A Program
Structure for Error Detection and Recovery," in _Lecture Notes in Computer Science 16_, ed. C. Kaiser, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1974.

Lync83a.

: Lynch, Nancy, "Multilevel Atomicity - A New Correctness Criterion for Database
Concurrency Control," _ACM Transactions on Database Systems_, vol. 8, no. 4, pp.
484--502, December, 1983.

Mossa.

: Moss, J. Elliot B., "Nested Transactions: An Introduction," unpublished, U.S.
Army War College.

Rand78a.

: Randell, B., P. A. Lee, and P. C. Treleaven, "Reliability in Computing System
Design," _Computing Surveys_, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 123--165, ACM, June, 1978.

Ullm82a.

: Ullman, Jeffrey D., _Principles of Database Systems, (2nd Edition)_, Computer Science Press, Rockville, MD, 1982.

:::
