In 1959--1960 the authors of this paper, aided by Dr.
Gladys Gallup, then of the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
carried out field investigations and developed
case studies of the work of some 15 Village Level Workers
in eight Community Development Blocks, located
in three states in India.[^/1] As the work proceeded it became
apparent that here, in a specifically rural and different
cultural context, were examples of role marginality in
many ways comparable to those of the foreman described
in the literature of industrial sociology.[^/2] The purpose of
this paper is to describe this marginal social role, to note
the more important pressures to which it is subject, and
to set forth the several adjustment patterns found among
these 15 role incumbents.[^/3]

# The Administrative Structure of Indian Community Development

The Community Development Program of India is a
major part of that country's vast effort toward economic
and social advancement. Basically it seeks to improve
economic productivity, health, and general well-being
by stimulating continuities of effective villager effort
through timely and strategic applications of governmental
incentives and resources at the local level.[^/4] At present
the program is administered through a central Ministry
of Community Development and Cooperation and the
various Development Commissioners in each of the Indian
states. The chief administrative unit at the operational
level is the Development "Block." Each block
functions directly under the Collector, or head of the particular
District within which the block is located. Districts
are the major administrative subdivisions within each
state.

[^/1]: See D. C. Dubey, Willis A. Sutton and Gladys Gallup, Village
Level Workers: Their Work and Result Demonstrations, Government
of India Press, Delhi, India, 1962, National Institute of Community
Development, Ministry of Community Development and
Cooperation. The "block" is the major operational unit in The
Administration of the Indian Community Development program.

[^/2]: See: Donald E. Wray, "Marginal Man of Industry: The Foreman,"
_American Journal of Sociology_, LIV (January, 1948), 298301;
Fritz J. Roethlisberger, "The Foreman: Master and Victim of
Double Talk," _Harvard Business Review_, XXIII (Spring, 1945),
285--294; Burleigh B. Gardner, "The Factory as a Social System"
in William Foote Whyte, (ed.) _Industry and Society_, McGraw-Hill
Book Co., New York and London, 1946, pp. 19--20; Burleigh B.
Gardner and William F. Whyte, "The Man in the Middle: Position
and Problems of the Foreman," _Applied Anthropology_, IV, No.
2 (1945); Eugene V. Schneider, _Industrial Sociology: The Social
Relations of Industry and the Community_, McGraw-Hill Book Company,
Inc., New York, 1957, pp. 136--144.

[^/3]: The particular VLWs studied were one of the better and one
of the poorer workers selected by the Block Development Officer
and his staff in each of seven blocks. In an eighth only one of the
better workers was studied. Thus, while these 15 VLWs cannot
be called a sample of any particular universe, since they do include
both good and poor workers from a number of jurisdictions, they
present for observation a reasonably wide representation of role
perceptions, social contexts, and adjustment patterns.

The average block has 80 to 150 villages with a total
population of from about 50,000 to 150,000. In 1959--60
there were about 1700 such blocks functioning within the
program. Each block is directed by a Block Development
Officer, the BDO, under whom functions a technical staff
of from four to seven persons in agriculture, health, co
operatives, etc. and about ten Village Level Workers.
Each Village Level Worker is responsible for a "circle"
of from five to fifteen villages depending upon their size,
accessibility, and the number of available workers.

The Ministry of Community Development and Cooperation,
the Development Commissioners, the District
Collectors, the block staffs and their VLWs, then, constitute
a vast administrative network designed to bring
about effective collaboration between government on the
one hand and Indian villagers on the other. These efforts
come to focus, however, at the position of the Village
Level Worker. He is the only man in day-to-day direct
contact with the villagers, whose change and development
are the _raison d'être_ of all the other aspects of administration.
Just as the foreman carries the essential
function of bridging the gap between management and
production workers in economic production processes, so
the VLW's role is crucial in bridging the distance between
administrative structure and villagers in the development
program of India.

[^/4]: See U. L. Goswami and S. C. Roy "India," chapter xvi in
Phillips Roupp (ed.), _Approaches to Community Development_, W.
Van Hoeve Ltd. The Hague, 1953; _Kurukshetra, a Symposium on
Community Development in India_ (1952--1955), The Publications
Division on behalf of the Community Projects Administration,
Delhi, 1955; _Social Progress Through Community Development_,
United Nations Bureau of Social Affairs, New York, 1955, pp. 67--75;
India Planning Commission, Community Projects Administration:
Report for 1952--53, New Delhi, 1953; and Report for 1953--54,
New Delhi, 1954; _Manual for Village Level Workers_, New Delhi,
1953; India, Planning Commission, Programme Evaluation Organization,
Evaluation Reports, New Delhi, 1954; Grace E. Langley,
"Community Development Programme, Republic of India," _Community
Development Review_, (September, 1957), 6--23 ; Carl C.
Taylor, "Making a Community Development Program Work,"
_Community Development Review_ (September, 1958), 40--54.


# Pressures from Two Social Structures

In general the job of the village level worker may be
said to involve two functions.

>He must help the villager identify and meet his
needs, and he must implement the plans of the state
and nation defined and made operational in the targets
and administrative requirements of his block.
Thus, the key role of the VLW is to link or mesh
village life and block policy.[^/5]

It is significant that in the community development
literature in India the incumbent of this position is referred
to by two equally valid terms --- the Village Level
Worker and the Gram Sevak. The title, VLW, emphasizes
his role as an employee in government with the
particular responsibility of representing the block to the
villagers. On the other hand, Gram Sevak, translated village
servant, emphasizes his role as a helper to the villagers
and his responsibility to speak for them to the
block. Let us now sketch the pressures coming from each
of the two systems which condition this role. Due care
must be shown for the uniquenesses of the pertinent parts
of the Indian social situation and for the distinctive
features of development work.

Pressures deriving from the village side of the VLW's
situation are twofold. Both grow from the villager's past
experience with outsiders. Before independence he experienced
outsiders as either persons bent upon their own
gain and, therefore, subject to considerable suspicion,
or as representatives of some system with considerable
largesse from which, in time, the villager himself might
hope to receive some share.

Since independence neither of these traditional views
has fit nor been helpful to Indian government officials
seeking to work with the villagers. There has been, of
course, some shift in these attitudes, but even today the
primary orientation of the villager is to get, with as
little contribution as possible on his part, all he can from
this "big-brother" --- government. Of course, the VLW has
received specific training designed, in part, to help him
overcome the remaining suspicion and to combat the villagers'
idea that the government has unlimited bounty.
But he still finds it difficult to allay all doubts and to
convince the villagers that they must add their own labor
to the resources of the government if progress is to be
made.

Of course, since the VLW's job is directly dependent
upon his administrative superiors in the block structure,
the pressures from this side of his situation are of crucial
importance. They stem primarily from the long
use in Indian administration of a system of top-to-bottom,
line authority.

[^/5]: Dubey, Sutton and Gallup, _op. cit_., p. 117. See also Howard W.
Beers "Relationships Among Workers in the Community Development
Block, A Report of Observations," Mimeographed Report for
the Ford Foundation in India, 1959, p. 6.


When community development work first began in
India it was separate from this general administrative
system. From its inception to 1955, the orientation of
the program was toward the careful use of technical
service and a free communication between subordinates
and superiors. It is within this orientation that VLWs
were and are trained. However, stimulated by the marked
successes of the early efforts, the demand for the program's
application in other parts of the country increased
rapidly and, in an effort to meet these demands
and to "move" the whole country as quickly as possible,
the program was hastily expanded and in 1955--56,
to facilitate the administration of the increasingly large
concern, operational blocks were placed under the various
District Collectors who generally held positions within
the Indian Administrative Service. The Indian Administrative
Service (I.A.S.) has been a powerful influence
in India for two centuries, but this set of civil
servants has been marked by two characteristics which
make difficult the execution of development work within
a democratic context --- lack of concern for technical
services and a distinctly autocratic orientation toward
subordinates.[^/6]

In the perspective of this nationwide civil service the
VLW is expected to be obedient as befits the lowest employee
in a line organization and to produce the maximum
results in village change with as little strain as possible
upon superiors and the limited resources of the program.
On the other hand he is propelled by his training toward
a different way of working. Each worker receives one
and a half years of problem-centered extension education
designed to fit him to work permissively with people
below him. This ill fits him for the role of a subordinate
in a highly structured administrative system.

# Pressures from the "Multi-Purpose" Orientation

The nature of the VLW's job specification has also
added to his burdens. From the first, he was defined as
a multi-purpose worker for at least two good reasons.
First, in the absence of enough trained specialists, he was
to be a person with elementary understandings in various
fields, able to render the first-line help needed most often
by the villagers. Second, since improvement efforts should
flow from the felt needs and interests of the people and
since these might fall in any realm, the VLW, who
was supposed to identify and work with these, had
to be able to direct his efforts to various purposes,
He was not expected to work in all these areas at
any one time, and he was to have ample "back stopping"
by extension specialists in each area.

In spite of this, however, the breadth of the job stimulated
confusion in the minds of the VLW, the villagers,
and the block staff members. Among the BDO and his
staff such confusion reinforced the "top-down" administrative
orientation and further rationalized the frequent
use of the VLW merely for errands and odd jobs. The
villager also misinterpreted the idea of a multi-purpose
worker. Recognizing that the Gram Sevak was supposed
to help him, he often made numerous petty demands upon
him. As for the VLW, his frequent lack of a clear understanding
of the real meaning of a multi-purpose function
left him fair game for pressures from both villagers and
block superiors. Often the VLW became quite literally a
village servant and a block errand boy.[^/7]

[^/6]: Albert Mayer and Associates in collaboration with McKim
Marriott and Richard L. Park, _Pilot Project_, India, University of
California Press, Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1958, pp. 67--68 and
325--326. See also Beers, _op. cit_., pp. 3--4.

# Factors Limiting Two-way Communication

Finally, it must be emphasized, that the basic function
of the VLW --- that of forging a functional linkage between
the village system and block administration --- is a complex
and difficult one. The two requisites for effectiveness are: 1) that he communicate his significant ideas and those of
his villagers UP to his block superiors and 2) that he
communicate the ideas and program policies of his superiors
DOWN to the villagers. But his efforts to carry
out communication in either direction immediately encounter
a number of built-in obstacles.

Seriously limiting upward communication is the tendency
of a centralized administrative bureaucracy to repress
rather than facilitate ideas and suggestions from
subordinates. To attempt to report his own or villagers'
ideas to his superiors is often hazardous. If the VLW
does so at all, he does it carefully, and always at some
risk.

On the other hand, other factors seriously interfere with
downward communication. His own lack of clear understanding
is the first of these. In an atmosphere where subordinates
find it hard to ask questions, discussion is inhibited
and clarity of aim is often obscured. Second, directives,
developed away from village conditions, often
reflect a certain unreality difficult to explain or interpret
to villagers. Third is the lack of experience among the
villagers themselves. The background upon which the
VLW can build in interpreting the meanings of policy
directives or targets may be thin indeed. Finally, there
is the continued tendency of many villagers to expect
governmental hand-outs and to be disappointed if not
critical when these are not delivered.

In summary, we may say that the Village Level Worker
role is one characterized by great complexity, conflicting
pressures, and loose and ambiguous definitions. On the
one hand, in training centers geared to the orientation of
early day successes, he becomes imbued with the goals
and methods of grass roots permissive work with people
and is led to expect such treatment for himself, Yet when
he reaches his post, he finds himself the lowest subordinate
in a relatively autocratic, administrative hierarchy,
geared to top-down operations. On another hand, the relatively
widespread loose acceptance of the multi-purpose
definition of his role makes extremely difficult any effort
he may make to organize his tasks within some coherent
and effective pattern. Further, in seeking to implement
his basic goal of upward and downward communication,
he faces numerous difficult barriers.

[^/7]: Beers, _op. cit_., pp. 6--7.

# Types of Role Conflict

Indeed, we may say that the VLW is exposed to at
least four types of role conflict. First, he must deal with
inconsistent normative structures --- those derived, on the
one hand, from his special training and, on the other,
those derived from the pattern of obedience expected in
a traditional bureaucracy. Second, he is often placed in
the midst of incompatible expectations from the block
itself. For example, he is pressed to meet his quota of
securing certain small savings contributions (equivalents
of U. S. government bonds) from the villagers --- an activity
which may easily engender hostile feeling --- but he
is also expected to develop friendly, cordial relations with
the people of his circle. Third, he is subject to conflict
engendered by the sheer multiplicity of his legitimate
duties --- to villagers, to the BDO, and to the various extension
officers. And finally, he is faced with the conflict
in expectations of the two social systems between which
he works, the block and the village.

# Adjustment Patterns

In the midst of these pressures and difficulties in what
ways do VLW's adjust? Several patterns were identifiable.
First, there is simply escape or abdication. Some
VLWs decide that the demands are too heavy; they resign
outright or at least give up any serious effort to
work and merely wait for a half-expected dismissal. One
stated bitterly:

>There is a world of difference between training and
work. In training they said everyone would help you,
but here no one helps. I am just a servant and there
is no hope of being promoted either, even if you do
a good job.[^/8]

Second, it is clear that the different adjustment patterns
of those remaining in the role derived mainly from
the strategies they develop to handle the problems imposed
by the marginality of the position. When the case
materials were carefully scrutinized, three patterns
emerged. The first may be termed the link pattern. Such
a man, working with both the village and the block systems,
brings about considerable communication between
the two and, thus manages to accomplish the basic function.
It is not easy, but it is done. These workers

>endeavor to match the resources and expectations of
the block programme with the needs and expectations
of the villagers ... adjusting block demand and
villager expectations to the extent possible within
their situation, communicating to a fair degree between
the two and, within limitations, succeeding in
planning and ordering their activities ... these VLWs
perform a delicate job ... Between failure to do what
is wanted by the villagers and failure to achieve the
goals of the block they walk a "tight rope." They
take calculated and purposive risks within the permissible
but undefined limits of both the block and
the village systems. Such limits are not uniformly
fixed; they become broader or narrower in direct relationship
to the VLW's acceptance by the villagers
and block officials and to his ability to perform. The
members of this group in different degree possess the
understanding necessary to soft pedal, on occasion,
either the block or the village or, at another time, to
indicate their preference with either, upon controversial
issues.[^/9]

[^/8]: Dubey, Sutton and Gallup, _op. cit_., pp. 55. Indeed, there was
no route of promotion open to the VLW. He did not occupy a
recognized position in the civil service hierarchy. Of the 15 VLWs
studied one was "waiting" to be dismissed and two were planning
to resign.

The second pattern observable among those remaining
in the role is that which may be termed the Block Pawn
constellation. Here heavy emphasis is placed upon identification
with administrative superiors in the block while
only minimal attention is given to the village system.
Since the power to hire and fire resides with the block,
it is not surprising that most of the VLWs who sided with
one or the other system, chose this adjustment strategy.
These VLWs abdicate their basic communication role
and simply become the kind of unquestioning subordinates
expected in a traditional administrative system. In
varying degrees,

 >... these VLWs accept and try to fulfill completely
whatever instructions the block issues. They make
little pretense of critical thinking in relation to any
instruction or action desired of them by their superiors.
"I do whatever I am told." "Whatever the superior
officers think and say, must be, and is, the
only just and right thing for me to do." Plainly these
VLWs feel that tempering orders in terms of practical
situations is beyond the realm of their consideration.
They tend to force the programmes from the top and
fail to communicate difficulties upward to their superiors.[^/10]

The third pattern we term the Village Idol. Here relatively
complete identification was made with the village
system while only minimal attention was given to the
block. The Village Idol pattern is probably relatively
rare.[^/11] It seems a likely derivative of that situation where
a worker has unusually frustrating experiences with superiors
combined with unusually gratifying ones with villagers.
Workers adjusting in this pattern carry out those
orders from the block which they must; but, instead of
communicating back and forth between the villagers and
their superiors, they join the villager in suspicion of the
outside, in belittling the program, and in exaggerated resentment
of all administrative difficulties or red tape.
Popularity with villagers becomes the main base of their
security and nearly all frustrations are viewed as mere
results of administrative stupidity or duplicity.

[^/9]: _Ibid_., pp. 118--120. It is a tribute both to the training program
and to the high zeal some workers bring to the job that, in spite
of the difficulties involved, five of the is workers achieved some
clear success in this linking operation,

[^/10]: _Ibid_, p. 122. Of the seven VLWs who adjusted by siding with
 one or the other system, five chose to become block pawns.

One other comment must be made. This has to do with
the balance of social forces moving the VLW toward one
or another of these patterns of adjustment. Except for his
training, the factors so far mentioned --- the heavy demands
of a loosely defined role, the marginal location of
the position, the pressures from each of the two traditional
systems --- tend to push the VLW to seek relief by
siding with either the village or the block and thus to
dilute or undermine the effectiveness of his contribution
to the program. There was one other factor, however,
which at least contributed to a condition wherein the
link role might develop. This was the widely accepted
pattern of long hours and dedicated, hard work. This was
observed frequently among VLWs we studied. Some
workers of all three varieties, worked a hard grind of 12
to 14 hours a day regularly week in and week out.

Two things appeared to be related to this. One was the
presence within a number of people with some education
of a high desire to work for their country's improvement
in a program felt to be important. The other was that
hard work remained one safe way any worker could ingratiate
himself with his superiors and thus insure for
himself some measure of security. To give evidence of
keeping on the go, of running here and there, always
working at this or that was one way of guarding what
was sometimes perceived as a fragile career. Of course
the amount contributed to the program depended upon
the insight of the worker. In some instances the toiling
became mere ritual --- a continual, blind following of block
directives or villager requests into a multitude of discrete
and meaningless chores. But when understanding
was joined to effort, such dedication yielded unexpected
achievements.

Here then are descriptions of the varying social contexts
of a role, crucial to one of the important development
programs of the world. They demonstrate again the
need for giving close attention to the social organization
of work. Effective work can scarcely be expected from
men who are surrounded by pressures which undermine
the manifest purposes of the jobs to which they are committed.
If development programs are to be effective, these
social forces must be carefully engineered.

[^/11]: Only two of the 15 cases exhibited this pattern of adjustment.
