# Abstract

_Within a year of Indian independence, the Communist Party of India declared
independence to be a false dawn and the whole Socialist bloc within the ruling
Indian National Congress cut its ties with the national government. The speed
with which the left disengaged from what had been a patriotic alliance under
colonialism surprised many at the time and has perplexed historians ever since.
Some have looked to the wider context of the Cold War to explain the onset
of dissent within the Indian left. This paper points instead to the neglected
domestic context, examining the lines of inclusion and exclusion that were drawn
up in the process of the making of the new Indian constitution. Once in power,
Congress leaders recalibrated their relationship with their former friends at the
radical end of the political spectrum. Despite some of the well-known differences
among leading Congress personalities, they spoke as one on industrial labour
and the illegitimacy of strikes as a political weapon in the first year of national
rule and declared advocates of class politics to be enemies of the Indian state.
Congress thus attempted to sideline the Socialists and Communists and brand
them as unacceptable in the new regime. This paper focuses on this first year of
independence, emphasizing how rapidly the limits of Indian democracy were set
in place._

\ 

# Introduction

Just six months after joining in the celebrations at the end of
British rule in 1947, the Communist Party of India declared Indian
independence to be a hollow falsehood. It announced that despite
its socialist rhetoric, the Congress-led Indian government was a
tool of Anglo--American business interests and Indian capitalism.
Such accusations did not go unchallenged. Using the same laws and
rationale of the previous colonial regime, government forces were
quick to arrest thousands of Communists throughout India.[^/1] Sedition,
it was clear, would not be tolerated in the newly liberated nation.
Conventional explanations for the Communists' change of line have
held that it had little to do with what was happening in India.
Rather, so the story goes, Indian Communists were merely echoing
their masters' --- the Soviet Union's --- position on bourgeois, or in this
case, Congress, nationalism, now that the Cold War was under way.[^/2]
Another explanation is that Communists were so buoyed by their
success among the peasants of Hyderabad that they believed they could
lead an India-wide revolution.[^/3] The object of this paper is to seek the
answer for the Communist _volte-face_ in India and, more specifically,
in the actions of the Congress government. It argues that in spite
of the Congress movement's tentative anti-colonial alliance with the
Communists in provincial politics throughout the interwar period, and
despite the strong relationship between Congress Socialists embedded
in the Congress party and the prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru,[^/4] once
in power, Congress altered its position. The right wing of the Congress
Party, led by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, decried any opposition to the
new regime as traitorous. Communists were not the only targets of
this reaction: fearing that they might radicalize the Indian working
class, Patel's campaign also branded other groups as _anti-national_.
Patel's strategy was successful not least because in the first year after
independence the Congress Socialists[^/5] had separated themselves from
Congress and the Communists had publicly detached themselves from
the nationalist movement by declaring, '_Yeh azaadi jhooti hai_!' (This
independence is a lie!). Thus, the Congress right had successfully
driven away those former allies who were bent on revolutionary
economic reform and also demonstrated what was acceptable and
unacceptable opposition in the new regime.

[^/1]: _See_ Sherman, T. (2010). _State Violence and Punishment in India_, Routledge,
Abingdon, for the continuities in attitudes towards seditionists in colonial and
independent India.

[^/2]: _See_ Windmiller, G. D. and Overstreet, M. (1959). _Communism in India_, University
of California Press, Berkeley.

[^/3]: Guha, R. (2007). _India After Gandhi_, Macmillan, London, p. 97.

[^/4]: _See_ Zachariah, B. (2004). _Nehru_, Routledge, Abingdon, pp. 79--86.

[^/5]: Early in 1947 the Congress leadership wanted the Congress Socialist Party to drop
'Congress' from its name, thus already claiming ownership of the title and marking
out the differences between 'Congress' and the left. At their Cawnpore conference, the
Congress Socialist Party agreed. Weiner, M. (1957). _Party Politics in India_, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, pp. 56--57.

Ten days before independence, Govind Ballabh Pant, the premier
of the United Province and a leading light in the Indian National
Congress, declared that anyone who opposed the Congress was a
traitor and should have his face blackened.[^/6] As Congress was the
movement that had led India to independence, its opponents were
opponents of the new India. Congress leaders varied in the language
they used to describe and classify the nation's enemies, but they agreed
on who was and who was not a patriot. This common front had already
been growing alongside Congress in a number of provinces of British
India throughout the decade before independence. So much so, that
in 1947, Congress leaders dealt with politicians outside their party
with both immense arrogance and the entire state apparatus of law
and order, exemplified by their treatment of Jinnah's All India Muslim
League. Along with members of the Hindu right-wing organizations
and politicians representing Muslims interests, left-wing activists
came under special scrutiny by the new regime, be they Communist
cadres or the Socialist allies within Congress.

It was easy for Congress leaders to deride communal politicians as
the latter were not speaking for the nation as a whole during this
crucial period of nation-building. Communal leaders, it was argued,
were partisan and only interested in advocating the causes of their
own community. They had no interest in making India secular and
followed policies antithetical to the Congress agenda. The case of
Communists and Socialists was completely different. Here were two
sets of politicians who were competing with Congress for the same
constituents and through the same means in a future democratic
polity. Their treatment at the hands of the ruling elite reveals the
limited political space afforded to the opposition in the highly charged
atmosphere following independence.

Historians across the political spectrum have followed the same
logic as the Indian National Congress and confined the Communists
and Socialists to the periphery of this period's history. Most scholars
conform to the view that at the time of independence the consolidation
of national statehood and power was the need of the hour. So, it is
presumed, politicians outside Congress were mistaken either because
they did not share the same vision of the new nation as those in the
Congress movement or they were advocating their differences in a non-constitutional manner at a time when the responsible, statesmanlike
Indians were busy building the foundations of a democratic India. It
follows that these political opponents either had the wrong politics or
the wrong way of conducting their politics.[^/7] This, of course, is not the
only way in which the period has been characterized. Some historians
simply skip the first year after 1947 in order to move on to the next
defining 'moment' of India's political history, commonly termed the
'Nehruvian' era. This historiography around democracy,[^/8] the building
of the constitution,[^/9] passive revolution,[^/10] and the nature and working
of the Indian state,[^/11] although an important contribution, runs the risk
of overlooking how fluid politics were in the birth pangs of the new
republic.[^/12] Rajnarayan Chandavarkar once said of labour historians,
'We have also remained averse to crossing the sacred divide of 1947.'[^/13]

[^/6]: He was referring to Hindu Mahasabha agitation in the Princely State of Rajkhot.
_Times of India_, 5 August 1947.

[^/7]: Chandra, Bipan (ed.). (1983). _The Indian Left_, Vikas Publishing House, Delhi, p. 260.
This standard interpretation is evident in most popular histories of the Indian
Communists. The same approach is also adopted by Communist writers themselves.
For example, see Bardhan, A. B. (2005). 80 CPI, CPI Publication, New Delhi.

[^/8]: _See_ Weiner, _Party Politics in India_; Kothari, R. (1982). _Politics in India_, Sangam,
Delhi; Brass, P. R. (1994). _The Politics of India Since Independence_, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge; Kohli, A. (1991). _Democracy and Discontent: India's Growing Crisis of
Governability_, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; Chatterjee, P. (2006). _Politics
of the Governed: Reflections on Popular Politics in Most of the World_, Columbia University
Press, New York.

[^/9]: _See_ Granville, A. (1999). _The Indian Constitution, Cornerstone of a Nation_, Oxford
University Press, New Delhi, 1999; and Khilnani, S. (1999). _The Idea of India_, Penguin,
New Delhi, pp. 33--38.

[^/10]: _See_ Kaviraj, S. 'On State, Society and Discourse in India', in Manor, J. (1991).
_Rethinking Third World Politics_, Longman, London; Chatterjee, P. 'Development
Planning and the Indian State', in Chatterjee, P. (1998). _State and Politics in India_,
Oxford University Press, New Delhi.

[^/11]: _See_ Fuller, C. J. and Benei, V. (2001). _The Everyday State and Society in Modern
India_, Hurst and Company, London.

[^/12]: Damodaran, V. (1992). _Broken Promises: Popular Protest, Indian Nationalism and
the Congress Party in Bihar 1935--36_, Oxford University Press, New Delhi; _Sarkar_, S.
(1982). 'Popular Movements, National Leadership and the Coming of Freedom with
Partition, 1945--47', _Economic and Political Weekly_, XVII, 14, 15, 16; Frankel, F, (2005).
_India's Political Economy_, 1947--2004, Oxford University Press, New Delhi; Chatterji, J.
(2005). _The Spoils of Partition_, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge; Zachariah, B.
(2005). _Developing India; An Intellectual and Social History c.1930--50_, New Delhi; Oxford,
Oxford University Press; and Bajpai, R. (2011). _Debating Difference: Group Rights and
Liberal Democracy_, New Delhi; Oxford, Oxford University Press.

[^/13]: Chandavarkar, R. (2009). _History, Culture and the Indian City_, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, p. 247.

This paper investigates the public declarations and private
correspondence of political leaders in the crucial period between
May 1947, when the interim government of Jawaharlal Nehru was
preparing to take over from the Raj, and May 1948, by which time the
Communists had set upon a vehemently anti-Congress militancy. It
was then, amid the trials of Partition, war against Pakistan, and threat
of famine --- and despite the misgivings of Jawaharlal Nehru --- that the
limits of acceptable political behaviour were defined by the Indian
state. Advocates of class struggle, be they striking workers or former
national heroes such as Sarat Chandra Bose,[^/14] were dubbed 'enemies'
of the state and the Congress right came to consolidate a powerful
grip over its political opponents. Moreover, as Dipesh Chakrabarty
shows, there was an attempt after independence to limit the kind of,
at times, spontaneous demonstrations, _satyagrahas_, and strikes that had
been the hallmark of Indian popular politics since the end of the First
World War.[^/15] In this febrile atmosphere, the Communist Party, once a
former ally of Congress and defender of its imprisoned leaders, found
itself excluded from the constituent assembly and, increasingly, from
the new languages of citizenship in post-colonial India.

# '_Swaraj_'

In the run-up to independence Congress leaders and the left shared
a similar vision of _swaraj_. For all parties, nationalism meant the
nationalization of key industries, some form of land distribution, and
a functioning democracy.[^/16] It also meant fighting communal violence
and a commitment to secularism in its Indian guise. _Swaraj_ was a
government based on universal suffrage and nationalized industry,
free from all connections to the colonial past or to the capitalist future.
This vision was ostensibly shared by capitalists and Communists alike.
For instance, when Sir Adarshir Dalal gave his first press conference
on assuming his position as the member for planning and development
in the Indian government, he publicly declared,

>It is certainly good to control capitalism and see that it is so managed that
it will do good. We do not propose to make any fundamental change in the
economic system of the country. There is no doubt that the existing order
should be modified in a more socialistic way. When we bring out our booklet
you will see that it tends more and more towards socialism.[^/17]

[^/14]: Sarat Chandra Bose was the radical Bengali politician who founded the
Revolutionary Socialist Party, briefly lead the Forward Bloc, and was the brother
of Subash Chandra Bose.

[^/15]: Chakrabarty, Dipesh (2007). '"In the Name of Politics": Democracy and the
Power of the Multitude in India', _Public Culture_, 19:1, pp. 35--57.

[^/16]: Frankel, _India's Political Economy_, pp. 28--71.

Sir Dalal was a director in Tata Industries and a signatory to the
first part of the Bombay Plan of 1944, a statement on India's economic
future put together by leading industrialists and 'economic experts' in
the country.[^/18] This was a significant indication of the diffusion of the
rhetoric of planning.

It would seem that they could agree with the writers on the
Communist newspaper, _People's Age_, that the ideal was a workers' and
peasants' state, like the Soviet Union where 'in Parliament, in the
army, in the economy, in every sphere it \[the Russian Revolution\]
put the common man in power and removed the privileged men from
their positions'.[^/19] By 1947 not only were these sentiments widely held,
at least ostensibly, but ministers in local and national government
were attempting to transform them into policy.[^/20] For example, in
the first months after independence a number of Congress workers
tried to enforce, through an amendment to the Trade Union Act,
penalties on unfair employers[^/21] and fair arbitration between workers
and employers. They were also working with _zamindars_ to enforce a
standardized system of land distribution.[^/22]

Independence had of course raised expectations, which, it was
recognized, national leaders needed to manage.[^/23] Voices of opposition
towards the new regime raged from both left and right but, looking at
the public pronouncements of Congress leaders, the most divisive
were those dealing with the organized working class. It was the
main constituency over which the Congress, Communist Party, and
Socialists did battle. If Indians were to adopt democracy and full
suffrage, the working population was a large pool of potential voters
that every party needed to influence. But workers were not simply
a vote bank. Through their unions and in their workplaces they
continued to battle against retrenchment, restrictive labour policy,
and enforced arbitration throughout the period of independence.[^/24]
The immediate aftermath of the Second World War saw the most
intense spell of strike action Indian industry had ever known.
Increasing food prices, the scarcity of basic commodities, and a fall
in real wages fed stories of corruption, black marketing, and hoarding
across the country. Strikes rose from 820 in 1945 (itself a high number
compared to previous years) to 1,629 and 1,811 in the two years
that followed. Union membership also grew in this period. In 1946--47 there was a 50% increase and in 1947--48 membership
grew by nearly 100%.[^/25] To combat this, on 11 March 1947,
the interim government led by Nehru promulgated the Industrial
Disputes Act.[^/26] This Act placed wartime machinery for the settlement
of industrial disputes in the statute books on a permanent basis. It gave
the government of India the power to refer disputes for adjudication to
industrial courts. As soon as a referral was made, any continuing strike
action was declared illegal and penalties could follow. It is here that the
differences of approach between the ruling party and its opposition are
most revealing. Politicians across the spectrum vied to portray their
own parties as the bastion of patriotism and the working class. The
Communists and the right wing of Congress had starkly opposing views
on the question of whether strikes were a legitimate expression of
dissent during this transitional time, while the Socialists and Congress
Gandhians equivocated. However, only Congressmen could wield the
power of the state and enforce the laws relating to strike action,
binding workers to laws governing strike action. Congressmen could
also use their position in government to discredit their opposition.
While members of this opposition cannot be described as voiceless
victims, throughout the process they were engaged in an unequal
battle in which their rhetoric of class struggle was the first casualty
when Congress consolidated its hold on the Indian government.

[^/17]: _Times of India_, 15 September 1944.

[^/18]: The other signatories were J. R. D. Tata, Sir Purshotamdas Thakurdas, G. D.
Birla, Sir Shr Ram, Kasturbhai Lal _Bhai_, A. D. Shroff, and John Matthai. Thakurdas,
Sir Purshotamdas _et al._ (1944). _A Brief Memorandum Outlining a Plan of Economic
Development for India_, New Book Co., Bombay. On the rhetoric of planning, see Chibber,
V. (2003). _Locked in Place: State-Building and Late Industrialization in India_, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, pp. 85--110.

[^/19]: _People's Age_, 2 November 1947.

[^/20]: _See_ Zachariah, Developing India, pp. 211--291.

[^/21]: The Trade Union (Amendment) Act, Act no. 45 of 1947, was passed on
20 December 1947. However, according to Vasant Karnick, it had not been used
by the time he wrote his book in 1978. Karnick, V. B. (1978). _Indian Trade Unions: A
Survey_, Popular Prakasham, Bombay, p. 166.

[^/22]: British Commonwealth Affairs --- India --- Monthly appreciation by UK High
Commissioner, 25 October 1947--7 November 1947, L/WS/1/1597, Oriental and
India Office Collections (British Libraries) (hereafter OIOC).

[^/23]: For example, Indian, 'Political Notes by "Candidus"' (pseudonym), _Times of India_,
November--January 1947--48 and Rao, L. B. 'A Gloomy View of the Opposition', _Times
of India_, 18 January 1948.

[^/24]: Bandhopadhaya, S. (2006). 'Freedom and its Enemies: Politics of Transition in
West Bengal, 1947--1949', _South Asia_ (n.s.) XXIX:1, pp. 43--68; Park, R. L. (1949).
'Labor and Politics in India', _Far Eastern Survey_, 18:16, pp. 181--187; Karnick, V. B.
(1967). _Strikes in India_, Manaktalas, Bombay; Chibber, _Locked in Place_.

[^/25]: Karnick, _Indian Trade Unions_, p. 161.

[^/26]: Act no. 14 of 1947.

# An uneasy alliance

In this mix the case of the Socialist Party is curious. A conglomeration
of the Congress Socialist Party and fellow travellers, it was a body
inside the Congress Party, allied with Nehru and very much part of
the ruling coterie in 1947. Congress included its leaders --- Jayaprakash
Narayan, Asoka Mehta, Prem Bhasin, Kamala Chattopadyaya,
Acharya Narendra Dev, Aruna Asif Ali, and Minocher Rustom
Masani --- in various decision-making bodies in and out of the Congress
Working Committee. Jayaprakash Narayan was confident that a
Congress Socialist would be made general secretary of the Party in
1947 and in September of that year Masani entered the government
with the portfolio of publicity officer for refugee news.[^/27]

However, not all Congress members were pleased with this cosy
relationship between Socialists and the ruling party. Patel in particular
was distrustful of the Socialists, seeing them as fair-weather, self-serving, and especially dangerous because their left-wing rhetoric
potentially alienated moderate sympathizers of Congress. As early as
April 1947, Patel was expressing concerns about the Socialists.[^/28] For
him Congress had no space anyway for members of different political
groups and divided loyalties --- it should comprise one party accepting
party unity. He publicly rebuked and slandered them, despite their
official position in government, and was critical of their stance on
labour issues. One of Patel's repeated refrains was that they lacked a
cohesive and united policy. For example, one reporter of the _Hindustan
Times_ celebrated the ridiculing of the Socialists by Patel thus:

>The Socialists got it in the neck but the Sardar did not use the axe. He used a
much sharper weapon --- sarcasm --- for which his utterances are famed. About
decontrol, for instance, the Socialists do not let one side of their mouth know
that what the other says meaning that Ram Manohar Lohia advocated the
policy while Asoka Mehta made it the basis of the token strike.[^/29]

[^/27]: _Times of India_, 15 September 1947.

[^/28]: _Bombay Chronicle_, 4 April 1947.

Despite their lack of consistency, as emphasized by Patel, the
Socialists spoke in unison, from the podium to the cabinet, about the
need to develop the country's economy on socialist lines. Asoka Mehta,
the Bombay trade union leader, publicly declared that Congress must
be a workers' party.[^/30] This blunt statement roundly contradicted the
advice of advocates of capitalism who were trying to influence the
economic direction of India. One such proponent was the ambassador
of the United States, Sir Henry W. Grady, who gave a lecture on
how capitalism was the best form of rule to the Rotary Club of
Bombay 15 days after independence.[^/31] Many Congress politicians
shared Mehta's views. For example, openly opposing the opinion of
industrialist entrepreneurs such as Gyansham Das Birla and Jehangir
Ratanji Dadabhoy Tata, Subash Chandra Bannerjee, thrice president
of the All India Trade Union Congress and now the labour, commerce,
and industry minister of West Bengal, declared that the next challenge
of independence was to fight capitalism.[^/32] In October of the same
year the stalwart Gandhian Socialist, Acharya Kripalani, general
secretary of Congress for 12 years and president of the Party from
November 1946 to November 1947,[^/33] declared that Bombay could set
the example of socialism for the rest of the country to follow.[^/34] Many
Congress firebrands who were not card-holding Socialists followed
Nehru's lead and advocated staunchly socialist policies. For example,
the Bombay premier, Balasaheb Gangadhar Kher, told industrialists
that in this new era of industrial democracy they should treat their
workers as partners and not menials.[^/35] The fact that the premier of
the city that was the home of the Indian Stock Exchange and a centre
of Indian capital was speaking a language similar to socialism suggests
that the Socialists had much to feel confident about in this period.

[^/29]: _Hindustan Times_, 26 January 1947. Decontrol here referred to the continued
use of wartime policies, food rationing, and price control. It was an issue that divided
Congress as Gandhi wanted controls to be lifted no matter what the consequences. For
him controls signified the continuance of colonial bondage. Others, more concerned
about the lack of enough food leading to potential famine, felt some form of
control was necessary. See Duncan, I. (1995). 'The Politics of Liberalisation in Early
Post-Independence India: Food Deregulation in 1947', _Journal of Commonwealth and
Comparative Politics_, 33:1, pp. 25--45.

[^/30]: _Times of India_, 6 November 1947.

[^/31]: _Times of India_, 27 August 1947.

[^/32]: At the first meeting of the West Bengal Indian National Trade Union Congress
(henceforth INTUC) meeting, Calcutta. _Times of India_, 16 September 1947.

[^/33]: Weiner, _Party Politics in India_, p. 68.

[^/34]: _Times of India_, 9 October 1947.

[^/35]: _Times of India_, 21 November 1947.

# Communist critics

The second group of politicians with whom Congress shared the same
language of _swaraj_ but who also competed for the same constituency
was the Communist Party of India. Relations between the two sets of
activists had been through peaks and troughs since the Party officially
formed in the 1920s partly because, although both sets of politicians
were united in their goal of independence, their political methods and
their supporters prevented them from agreeing a common strategy.
Entrenched political relationships between Congress members and
Communists also created different political equations, from province
to province. For example, Congress members relied heavily on
Communists in provinces such as Punjab where Congress was weak,
while conversely they competed vociferously against Communists in
provinces such as Bombay and the United Province where Congress
was strong.

In terms of direct action against the Communist Party, in 1945
a subcommittee comprising the Congress leaders Pant, Patel, and
Nehru began investigating the Communist Party. They formally
charged the accused members of the Party of 'acting in opposition
to Congress policy', citing Communist participation in the British war
effort in 1942. In December of the same year they pushed through a
resolution in the Congress Working Committee to oust all Communist
cadres from the Congress Party.[^/36] This may have been a logical
consequence of the national movement becoming a political party
in a new era of party political politics, but in practice this act excluded
a number of renowned and respected left-wing activists from positions
of power in the national movement and publicly cast their patriotism
into doubt.

Despite their shared language, _swaraj_ meant something altogether
different for Congressies and Communists. The Communists
presented an alternative _swaraj_ to large swathes of the Indian
population who they mobilized to oppose the ruling elite, be it
colonial or Congress. Congress leaders were alive to the threat that
Communists posed to their new power. In particular, Communists
caused trouble in the south of India and also in Hyderabad, a princely
state with a Muslim Nizam in the centre of Indian territory, where
they had linked up with peasant rebellions in 1946. Hyderabad was
particularly troubling for the Indian government as Communists were
effectively mobilizing peasants against the Nizam. All in all, the
struggle lasted four years from 1946 and involved 3,000 villages across
316,000 square miles.[^/37] Hundreds of Communists were detained
and this trend continued long before Indian independence. For
example, by early 1947 the Madras government had already arrested
148 Communists under the Madras Maintenance of Public Order
Ordinance.[^/38] A year later, a _Times of India_ 'special correspondent'
travelled to the state and with the help of local _zamindars_ attempted
to garner the truth. He reported that Communists were 'terrorizing'
the fearful and simple peasants of the state:[^/39]

>We found concrete evidence of Communist terrorism in the shape of burnt
down and demolished houses. The Communists symbols \[sic.\] of sickle and
hammer were painted in red on the walls of the houses of the village officials.
We obtained irrefutable evidence from villagers of Communist atrocities.[^/40]

[^/36]: Mitra, N. N. (1946). _Indian Annual Register, 1945, Volume I, January--June_, Annual
Register Office, Calcutta, pp. 112--122.

In such a context the public utterances of government ministers on
Communists took on the same tone as the erstwhile colonial rulers.
Ministers labelled Communists as outsiders, bent on infiltration, _anti-national_, and out to cause destruction. Congress speeches reminded
audiences of the Communist betrayal in 1942 when they had
supported British war efforts rather than participate in the nationalist
_Quit India_ movement. They stressed Communist dependence on the
Soviet Union and linked them to a foreign and _anti-national_ doctrine.[^/41]
The Communists were not only unpatriotic, but they also possessed
peculiar mindsets, that is to say, they were said to be autocratic and
religious in their faith in Marxist orthodoxy.[^/42] These characterizations
abounded long before the Communists had taken up the extreme left
line.

[^/37]: _Sarkar_, S. (1989). _Modern India_, Macmillan Press, London, p. 442.

[^/38]: The Communist Party of India, L/WS/1/749, OIOC.

[^/39]: Sunday News Correspondent, '"Red" Terrorism in Hyderabad', _Times of India_,
25 January 1948.

[^/40]: _Ibid_. The fact that the results of the first general election in India showed
the highest polling member of parliament to be a Communist returned from the
Telangana constituency suggests that the fear of Communists was not as universally
felt as the special correspondent chose to report.

[^/41]: In the main, they all echoed Jayaprakash Narayan's words: 'The Communists
were only Russian patriots who were unreliable, undependable and who betrayed and
stabbed the country in the back in her hour of need. The Communists do not work
in the interests of the country but according to the dictates and commands of the
Russian government. As a nationalist I believe it will be in the best interest of India to
maintain friendly relations with Russia but you should not permit agents of a foreign
power to work, grow and prosper in our country.' Speech made at Bangalore, 9 March
1947, Communist Survey, 15 December--15 May 1947, Communist Activity in India,
1946--48, L/PJ/12/432, OIOC.

The Communists responded through their press and public presence
and presented a constant and credible critique of the Indian state.
They were not simply critical: Communist writers openly celebrated
independence but also urged caution. The 15 August issue of People's
Age is replete with the warnings:

>But the battle which the martyrs began had not ended: the enemy has been
compelled to retreat but aims desperately to maintain his control, militarily
and economically, over our Motherland. And while we are busy preparing
to celebrate the Great Day in whatever way we can, the imperialists are
feverishly going ahead with their own plans to place their men in key positions
all over the country.[^/43]

Instead of falling in line and waiting patiently for the government to
reveal its long-term economic agenda, the Communists accused Nehru
and his cohort of betraying the promises they had made in the run-up
to independence. They focused on the fact that, far from severing ties
with their colonial past, members of the Constituent Assembly of India
were drawing up a constitution that took large chunks of legislation
from the 1935 Government of India Act. Moreover, the Constituent
Assembly had sent Sir B. N. Rau, the constitutional adviser, to the
United States and Ireland to garner advice on constitution building.[^/44]
Even Puran Chand Joshi, the general secretary of the Party and friend
of Nehru, writing in the _People's Age_, expressed his indignation with the
Congress leaders because they had too readily adopted the draconian
public order measures of the British Indian government in their new
model constitution. While Joshi was glad that it enshrined universal
adult suffrage,

> \[it\] also reproduces several reactionary and autocratic features of British rule
in India. The same second chamber to delay rapid democratic progress, the
same special powers that were so liberally used by British Governors ... to
crush every popular rising for freedom and a better life.[^/45]

[^/42]: Kapadia, G. R. 'The Baffling Russian Mind', _Times of India_, 9 November 1947.

[^/43]: _People's Age_, 15 August 1947.

[^/44]: _Times of India_, 17 October 1947.

Most significantly, while the rest of the media had imposed a form
of self-censorship when the government was dealing with communal
riots and the fall-out of Partition, the Communist _People's Age_ exposed
details of each massacre and the government's inability to deal with it
all.[^/46] Indeed, the high commissioner for the United Kingdom reported
back that the government of Bombay had prohibited the _People's Age_
from publishing anything to do with 'the communal situation or on
questions concerning relations between India and Pakistan' for one
month in December 1947. He went on to state that, 'This paper has
been practically the only one in India during recent months to expose
details of (a) the killings in the Punjab Sikh states, the East Punjab
and Delhi and (b) the activities of the extreme Hindu organizations
in the disturbed areas.'[^/47]

Communists expressed disillusionment with the Congress leaders
of India within weeks of independence. They focused their spotlight
on Jawaharlal Nehru to show the country his ineptitude at confronting
communalism. For example, in a speech in September 1947,
Balchandra Trimbuk Ranadive said,

>Jawaharlal is afraid of taking the name of Muslims today. His speech did not
appeal to the humanism inside the people. He did not rouse the nationalism
of the people. He did not call upon the people to rise in defence of freedom
and stop riots. For that needed a sense of realism, a sense of responsibility
that is lacking today.[^/48]

Ranadive argued that these riots and communal massacres not only
damaged community relations in affected areas, they also brought the
Indian nation into disrepute on the world stage. For example, they
characterised Congress actions as so weak that they were bringing
shame on the representatives of the new country in the United Nations.
He extolled:

>With what face can Vijaya Lakshmi fight for the democratic rights of Indian
peoples in South Africa? Smuts will fling on her face the challenge that after
all I have only segregated the Indians and not massacred and transferred
as is being done by your government. Thus these riots have deprived our
representatives at the United Nations of moral strength to stand and fight
for democracy.[^/49]

[^/45]: _People's Age_, 31 August 1947.

[^/46]: British Commonwealth Affairs --- India --- Monthly appreciation by UK High
Commissioner, 6--19 December 1947, L/WS/1/1597, OIOC.

[^/47]: _Ibid_.

[^/48]: Ranadive was known as 'BTR'. 'BTR on the riot situation and our tasks'. Speech
delivered in the GB meeting held in RF Hall on 18 September 1947, Communist
Party of India 1947/18(A), P. C. Joshi Archives.

For Ranadive, only Communists could be trusted to defend Indian
independence and democracy. The actual content of this democracy
was unclear but he was adamant that it meant a defeat of the Hindu
right-wing agenda. To achieve this end he encouraged his comrades
to join the National Home Guard:

>We have to enrol ourselves in Home Guards. How can an organised party like
ours keep aloof of Home Guards and allow that to be filled by RSS who are
out to instigate riots? Today it is not enough to speak of democracy. We must
be able to defend it physically.[^/50]

These public pronouncements suggest that Communists were
posing as more nationalist, more democratic, and more resolute than
their Indian Congress counterparts. However much they celebrated
the virtues of the Soviet Union,[^/51] the Communist press was dominated
in the main by reportage of the various local struggles across the
sub-continent at this time, struggles in which Communists were
deeply involved. This was particularly true of the Telangana struggle
but they also wrote about events in Tebhaga, Manipur, Kashmir,
Bombay, West Bengal, Delhi, and East Punjab which were bringing
out hundreds of thousands of industrial workers, office employees,
peasants, students, and refugees. At a time of instability, the
Communists were incre asingly critical of the government's actions
and, as a stronger party than the Socialists, were able to do so with
more impact.

# Divide and rule

The question of labour (that is, the role of unions and the right
to strike) constituted the largest threat posed by Communists and
Socialists to the government. And it was on the labour question that
the government proved to be especially brutal in its response.

[^/49]: _Ibid_.

[^/50]: _Ibid_.

[^/51]: _People's Age_, 2 November 1947.

In 1947 the All India Trades Union Congress (AITUC) was the
largest federation of organized labour in the country. Despite being
led by the respected Liberal trade unionist, N. M. Joshi, since 1940,[^/52]
it was, for all intents and purposes, dominated by Communists. They
had achieved this through their ability to work for labour interests in
the industrial centres of India, while Congress nationalist and Socialist
union activists had been jailed for taking part in the 1942 _Quit India_
movement. Conversely, this was the moment that the British had
legalized the Communist Party of India because of its support for
the war against Hitler and the Axis powers. However, they were not
the only 'collaborationist' union federation. The Indian Federation of
Indian Labour, established by the former Communist, Manbendra
Nath Roy, also had a free, if weaker, hand to organize unions in
this period. By contrast, the Hind Mazdoor Sevak Sangh set up in
1938 by Gandhi's followers in Congress, proved moribund while its
leaders were in jail. The dominance of AITUC in the industrial trade
unions was thus clear. So much so, that in 1946, S. C. Joshi, the chief
labour commissioner of India, inspected the AITUC and declared it
to be a representative federation of Indian labour,[^/53] and in November
of the same year the leadership of the Hind Mazdoor Sevak Sangh
passed a resolution to urge its members to join AITUC. This position
gave the Communist leadership the power to claim to represent the
labouring poor. They were able to use district and factory committees
to build up a support base for their ideas and recruit more cadres
to the Communist Party. In these ways Communist unions became a
serious headache for Congress leaders who were friends of industry,
commerce, and the landed peasantry in India.

In May 1947, Sardar Patel began to make his moves against
AITUC. His task was made easy because industrial relations were
being widely reported in the Indian press on a daily basis. One
example of such reportage was the Bombay Industrial Conditions
Enquiry Committee's interim report on the cotton textile industry
in Khandesh. This enquiry was part of an ongoing investigation on
working and living conditions in various industrial sectors and was
particularly important because of Bombay's position as the industrial
nerve centre of the country. The Committee members, two Indian
Civil Service officers, and the assistant commissioner of Labour,
Ahmedabad, found that strikes had increased but they did not blame
the textile workers for this 'regrettable' fact. Violence and indiscipline
had grown among workers because factory owners treated them badly
and Communists exploited this fact. In fact 'Communist propaganda
and incitement are probably the most powerful of all causes of
the recent disturbances to industry.'[^/54] To check this development,
Congress leaders were advised that they needed to loosen the
Communists' grip over workers as well as strive for better labour
conditions and standards of living. For the Committee, 'Khandesh is a
warning of the danger threatening the whole fabric of society through
Communist exploitation of unredeemed grievances of working class
illiteracy. The menace cannot be ignored.'[^/55]

[^/52]: Karnick, V. B. (1972). _N. M. Joshi: Servant of India_, United Asia Publishers,
Bombay, p. 257.

[^/53]: Joshi, S. C. (1947). _Report Regarding the Representative Character of the All-India Trade
Union Congress and the Indian Federation of Labour in 1946_, Government of India Press,
New Delhi.

These warnings were not lost on Sardar Patel, the man in the interim
government on whom industrialists and the Hindu right could rely. He
was also in a position to act as he was head of the Home Department
from 1946. Patel was known for consolidating the princely states into
the Indian union. However, he was also anxious to neutralize the
Communist influence over unions, not simply to consolidate Congress
power, but to prevent Communists from strengthening their own
support bases in India and abroad through their union positions. As
he explained in a letter to a regional minister,

>At present, the Communist Party gets all the privileges and advantages from
Government because of their being in charge of the Trade Union Congress.
Their membership is largely bogus and their control over labour is restricted
to their ability to create mischief. If the Government were to withdraw the
recognition which gives them the advantages, they would lose their influence
considerably.[^/56]

His solution to this problem was not simply to call Communists
names and refer to their 'traitorous' past. Instead, it was to drive
a wedge between them and their membership by creating an
alternative trade union organization --- the Indian National Trades
Union Congress (INTUC). In May 1947, he attempted this by
organizing a conference of the Hind Mazdoor Sevak Sang, of which he
was president, with Gulzarilal Nanda, at which labour leaders declared
their allegiance to INTUC. This would, Patel presumed, attract the
support of non-Communist union leaders and politicians:

> It was with the object of counteracting their influence that we organised a
separate movement known as the Indian National Trade Union Congress a
month ago ... Our idea was and still is to recognise the INTUC if it is properly
organised; and if all the non-Communist forces were combined, the INTUC
would be much more powerful and strong than the All India Trade Union
Congress. It would then be easy for Government to give recognition to the
new organisation.[^/57]

[^/54]: _Times of India_, 17 May 1947.

[^/55]: _Ibid_.

[^/56]: Sardar Vallabhai Patel to Dr Sampurnanand, Minister of Education and Finance,
United Provinces, 18 June 1947. Das, D. (1973). _Sardar Patel's Correspondence, Volume
10, 1945--50_, Navajivan House, Ahmedabad, p. 332.

The success of this venture depended on the participation of
Socialists and other left wing party activists leaving AITUC. When the
idea was mooted, some Socialists responded positively. For example,
the United Province union leader, Hariharnath Shastri, a member of
the National Executive of the Socialist Party, resigned from the Party
because he felt that the country needed unity between labour and
Congress.[^/58] On the other hand, others such as Jayaprakash Narayan,
deliberated and then refused,[^/59] while Asoka Mehta vehemently
disagreed that a new organization needed to be set up. He felt
that AITUC, despite its Communist leanings, had the confidence
of organized workers. For him, increased government legislation,
checks, and regular elections would force AITUC to become more
representative of labour across the board. Mehta felt that the creation
of INTUC was dangerous for workers as it would force arbitration in
industrial disputes. While this was not a problem in itself, because of
the strong link between Congress and INTUC, the arbitration would
not always be in the workers' interests.[^/60] In this way Patel's plans
to work with the Socialists failed as they not only participated in
strike action organized by unions that were not affiliated to INTUC[^/61]
but also formed yet another national union federation, the Hind
Mazdoor _Panchayat_, in 1948.[^/62] Indeed, it could be argued that AITUC
membership only weakened when its members felt alienated by the
Communist left turn after February 1948. This is reflected in the fact
that although Patel's INTUC was formally created in May 1947, the
Congress Working Committee had to issue a resolution five months
later in September 1947 to encourage Congress members to 'get those
unions which they are organizing and of which they are members,
affiliated to the newly formed INTUC'.[^/63] By March 1949 INTUC
membership had grown to 986,983 compared to AITUC's 679,143
and the government nominated INTUC members to represent Indian
labour at International Labour Organization meetings.[^/64] Thus, the
larger goal of attenuating AITUC's grip on labour was achieved,
especially when the Socialists decided to form yet another alternative
central union, the Hind Mazdoor Sabha, in December 1948. This is
reflected in N. M. Joshi's plea to the Socialists when they quit the
AITUC earlier in the same year:

>I make a special appeal to the Socialist leaders in the trade union movement.
The declared objective of the AITUC is the establishment of socialism, i.e.,
the same as that of the Socialist Party ... I appeal to them not to lightly cast
away the unity of our class action.[^/65]

[^/57]: _Ibid_.

[^/58]: Weiner, _Party Politics in India_, p. 61.

[^/59]: _Ibid_. p. 50.

[^/60]: _Ibid_.

[^/61]: Zaidi, A. M. (1988). _INC the Glorious Years, Volume 4; 1939--1950, Texts of the
Resolutions Passed by the INC, the AICC and the CWC_, Indian Institute of Applied Political
Research, New Delhi, p. 356.

[^/62]: Memorandum on the activities of the All India Socialist Party between July 1947
to April 1948, Intelligence Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs, India, 25 June 1948,
M/O States Political 373-P/48, National Archives of India (hereafter NAI).

Joshi's appeal was in vain and, isolated amid an increasingly hostile
Communist cohort, he resigned from AITUC in February 1948.[^/66]

To control workers was not an end in itself. Congress leaders were
reminded of the importance of labour from a range of different
economic interests in 1947. Labour was vital to the development of
the country, and a volatile labour force could disrupt any planning
measures that leaders such as Nehru were making, whether they
were in or out of unions. The main weapon of labourers was to
strike. And in the months either side of independence, workers from
the North Western railway through to clerks in Calcutta and mill
hands in Bombay continued to use their ability to strike, although
much of this went unreported as newspaper editors practised self-censorship. Between 1947 and 1949, India saw 3,990 strikes up
and down the country.[^/67] The reason for these actions ranged from
locale to locale: the rights of _dalits_ to enter temples in Kerala,
layoffs among the workforce in Bombay, traditional entitlements
for farm workers in Bengal. In other words, striking continued at
the same levels as had been experienced during the last years of
British rule. Many denounced these outbreaks and now had the added
advantage of using nationalist rhetoric to condemn worker initiatives.
For example, the industrialist J. R. D. Tata demanded that the
government deal with strikes with a firm hand in order to ensure
increased production.[^/68] Even more telling, members of Congress
who had not uniformly condemned strikes before independence now
quickly turned on strikers as acting illegitimately in the new regime.

[^/63]: Zaidi, _INC the Glorious Years_, p. 320.

[^/64]: Park, 'Labor and Politics in India', p. 186.

[^/65]: Dufty, N. F. (1964). _Industrial Relations in India_, Allied Publishers, Bombay, p. 121.

[^/66]: _Ibid_.

[^/67]: Rao, P. L. and Raju, P. R. K. (2010). _Industrial Relations in India: Beginning of
Working Class to Date, 1850 to 2009_, Excel Books, New Delhi, p. 121.

However divided Congress members may have been on a number of
issues, during this period they spoke as one on the issue of strikes.
The government could not deal effectively with striking workers
while Delhi, the Indian capital, was overwhelmed with refugees and
communal genocide. Indeed, in this situation it was Nehru and not
Patel who condemned strikers as selfish traitors.[^/69] For him, they were
bringing shame on the nation as no work meant poverty and a bad
name abroad.[^/70] The Socialist, Jayaprakash Narayan, urged textile
workers to return to work and in doing so end the cloth famine
'afflicting the nation'.[^/71] The labour minister, Nanda, insisted that
the big textile strike in Bombay was illegal, and Dr Bhimrao Ramji
Ambedkar's union, the Rashtriya Mazdoor Sangh, urged workers to
stop the strike.[^/72]

These speeches had no effect. In October, more textile workers went
out on strike in Ahmedabad while women joined the mill workers
out in Bombay, culminating in a lightning strike which brought out
4,500 strikers at the end of the month. Under the Industrial Disputes
Act, all of these strikes were illegal. On 7 November --- the day Indian
troops fought to defeat Pakistani raiders in Kashmir --- Nanda issued
a broadcast on All India Radio.

>The leaders of a trade union who takes the workers out on strike is an enemy
of the country. The workers who go out on strike are their own worst enemies.
They incur immediate loss for themselves. Much worse than that, they are
pulling down the economic structure of the country.[^/73]

[^/68]: _Times of India_, 27 August 1947.

[^/69]: Speech by Jawaharlal Nehru on 30 September 1947. Gopal, S. (1986). _Selected
Works of Jawaharlal Nehru, Second Series, Volume_ Four, Jawaharlal Nehru Memorial Fund,
Teen Murti House, New Delhi, p. 108.

[^/70]: _Ibid_.

[^/71]: _Times of India_, 29 September 1947.

[^/72]: _Times of India_, 24 September 1947.

Nanda's point was to urge workers to see themselves as soldiers,
carrying out their duty, sacrificing their own interests for that of the
nation. One response to this plea was immediate: over 8,000 Bombay
dockworkers came out on strike.[^/74]

Over the next two months the government brought industrialists
and labour leaders together in a quest to remedy the situation and
confer and arbitrate over the strikes. Some deals were struck, and
Nehru was able to report to his state premiers that all had agreed on a
three-year truce in industrial relations. This meant that union leaders
had agreed to no strikes and factory owners had agreed to no lockouts
for three years, while all concerned were to work on establishing
effective mechanisms to settle industrial disputes.[^/75] However, peace
did not even last three weeks. On 29 December 1947, the Socialist
Party of Bombay, joining local Communists, staged a strike in protest
against the new strike adjudication machinery.[^/76] To prevent the
strike from taking place, the Congress-led state government banned
all political conferences due to take place in Bombay during the
same period. In response 3,000 students took to the streets and
clashed with police. Inevitably the _People's Age_ roundly condemned the
Bombay government for its handling of the situation. The Communist
newspaper declared,

>The workers of Bombay, including the suburbs have pronounced their
judgement on the most anti-democratic labour policy, the policy of decontrol
and the most shameless suppression of civil liberties, pursued by the Congress
ministry of Bombay. The workers have declared that these policies must go,
that the Police Raj sought to be clamped on the people of Bombay by the
Home Minister, Morarji Desai, must end.[^/77]

The government reaction to these events was mixed. Nehru was
sickened by the 'betrayal' of the Socialists but also mindful of the
fact that 'Government also have to carry people with them and any
government which has to indulge in repeated conflicts with the people
has somehow lost touch with their prevailing sentiment.'[^/78] He knew he
could only deal with Communists if they broke the law because they
were not in Congress. He was most angered by the student action,
claiming that, 'Students in India have lost any sense of discipline and
it is not easy to deal with them by methods of force and compulsion
though these may have to be resorted to sometimes.'[^/79] Morarji Desai
echoed this sentiment in speeches made in Bombay at the same time.[^/80]
In a letter to Gulzarilal Nanda, the Labour minister, Nehru's anxieties
were clear:

>I have been myself greatly distressed by the strikes that are going on. I have no
doubt that the token strike was wrong and that the present strike of the Port
Trust Employees is also wrong. What worries me however is the fact that we
have got so cut off from large sections of the public that we cannot influence
them sufficiently. Right or wrong, the fact that our lead is not followed is itself
a matter of significance. The Congress prestige has diminished tremendously
although individual Congressmen are still respected.[^/81]

[^/73]: _Times of India_, 7 November 1947.

[^/74]: _Times of India_, 14 November 1947.

[^/75]: Jawaharlal Nehru to Premiers, 19 December 1947. Gopal, _Selected Works of
Jawaharlal Nehru_, p. 463.

[^/76]: Indian High Commissioner's summary and appreciation of position from 27
December 1947 to 2 January 1948 to Commonwealth Relations Office, DO 35/3159,
The National Archives (TNA).

[^/77]: _People's Age_, 4 January 1948.

Although here Nehru was showing sensitivity to the image and status
of Congress, he had nothing to say about the reasons why the workers
were striking. They were simply wrong.

Patel's response was predictably far more aggressive. In the new
year, Patel addressed a crowd of 800,000 in Calcutta. He was jubilant
after the left had failed to rally people against a security bill which
would authorize the imprisonment of citizens for up to six months
without trial, a bill the speakers on the left proclaimed was antithetical
to the nationalists of old. He told the audience that the government
was theirs now; they had no reason to strike.[^/82] In Lucknow, he
continued in the same strain, explaining to labour leaders that the
situation was now different and strikes were a weapon of the past:

>I appeal to labour leaders not to foment strikes and create disturbances.
There is no alien power. It is easy to approach us now. Why should labour
leaders not come straight to us and tell about the grievances of labour? The
Trades Union Congress is working under the influence of Communists. The
days of strikes and hartal are gone. They were needed when we were fighting
against a foreign power. Those factions must cease now.[^/83]

[^/78]: Jawaharlal Nehru to B. G. Kher, Premier of Bombay, 5 January 1948. Gopal, S.
(1987). _Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru, Second Series, Volume Five_, Jawaharlal Nehru
Memorial Fund, Teen Murti House, New Delhi, p. 4.

[^/79]: _Ibid_.

[^/80]: _Times of India_, 6 January 1948.

[^/81]: Jawaharlal Nehru to Gulzarilal Nanda, Labour Minister, Bombay, 22 January 1948. Gopal, _Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru_, pp. 356--357.

[^/82]: _Times of India_, 6 January 1948.

He called strike leaders 'terrorists'[^/84] and warned strikers they were
ruining India.[^/85] Striking workers also attacked Patel. At a rally in
Bombay, striking Bombay Port Authority workers heckled him and
tried to break up the meeting when he railed against strikes. Instead
of listening to their demands, he insisted that politicians known for
their 'disregard of India' were inciting the workers. Paraphrasing his
speech a reporter put it thus: 'The Communists, who helped the British
government during the war years while Congress leaders were in jail,
were engineering labour unrest now when the Congress was running
the government of the country.'[^/86]

# The Socialists depart

On 30 January 1948, Mahatma Gandhi was shot dead at a prayer
meeting in Delhi. It had an immediate effect on the nation and
seems to have to have brought an end to the communal rioting
that had endured for over a year. Recent research has illustrated the
extent to which Congress used Gandhi's death and memorialization
to consolidate its own power.[^/87] Gandhi's death certainly affected the
fate of the opposition in India --- and did not stop at the right wing
organization from which his assassin came. Jayaprakash Narayan
quickly came out to condemn the inability of the police and hence
Patel's Home Ministry, to protect Gandhi during his public vigils.
He suggested that the police were, in a sense, responsible for the
Mahatma's death. This was the last straw for Patel. His reaction to
that particular insinuation was iterated in a speech to the Congress
Legislature Party just days after the assassination:

>(T)he Socialist Party were offered seats on the Congress Working Committee.
They refused. They were then offered seats in the Central Government. They
refused. I then made an offer to hand over one province to them to carry on
their experiments without let or hindrance. They refused. And today they
exploited the greatest misfortune and calamity of the nation for party end.[^/88]

[^/83]: _Ibid_.

[^/84]: _Times of India_, 18 January 1948.

[^/85]: _Times of India_, 6 January 1948.

[^/86]: _Times of India_, 21 January 1948.

[^/87]: Khan, Y. (2011). 'Performing Peace: Gandhi's Assassination as a Critical
Moment in the Consolidation of the Nehruvian State', _Modern Asian Studies_, 45:1,
pp. 57--80.

The simmering hostility, which long predated Gandhi's death, had
blown up into open enmity. In December 1947 Ram Monohar Lohia,
the Socialist Party leader demanded Indian general elections be held
in 1948.[^/89] He was convinced that the Socialists would win, or at
least win enough seats to direct the future direction of the Indian
government. His confidence was also boosted by their 'considerable'
success when contesting the Bombay Municipal Corporation elections
in early January in which they won 26 seats at the expense of
mainly Congress rivals.[^/90] Furious that the Socialists had dared to
stand against Congress in an election, the Bombay Socialists were
ousted from the Party: following Jayaprakash's missive against his
Home ministry, Patel pushed the All India Congress Committee
to bar from Congress any member who was affiliated to another
political party.[^/91] This _de facto_ knocked out the Socialists. Thus on
22 March 1948 the Indian Socialist Party officially withdrew their
allegiance to the Indian National Congress at their annual convention.
Socialist Party leaders sought to form an independent opposition to
the ruling party, which, they claimed, was busy placating 'capitalists',
while Communists were pursuing their own, unpatriotic ends. Since
independence, debates had been raging inside the Socialist Party about
its the role within Congress.[^/92] This announcement made clear that
those within the Party who were confident of electoral success when
free of the Congress brand, had won the argument a good six months
after independence. The passage of the Socialist Party out of Congress
had been made easier by Patel's push, much to the dismay of Socialists
like Jayaprakash who had hoped to influence Congress by staying and
fighting from inside it. Nehru, the Socialist Party's consistent ally,
expressed his own despair:

[^/88]: Sardar Patel's Rejoinder on Security Measures for Gandhiji's Protection,
4 February 1948. Chopra, P. N. (1998). _The Collected Works of Sardar Vallabhai Patel,
Volume XIII (1 January 1948--31 December 1948)_, Konark Publishers, Delhi, p.88.

[^/89]: 6--19 December 1947, L/WS/1/1597, OIOC.

[^/90]: Memorandum on the activities of the All India Socialist Party between July
1947 to April 1948, Intelligence Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs, India, 25 June
1948, M/O States Political 373-P/48, NAI; Election results in 20--27 February 1948,
L/WS/1/1597, OIOC.

[^/91]: Weiner, _Party Politics in India_, p. 57.

[^/92]: Memorandum on the activities of the All India Socialist Party between July 1947
to April 1948, Intelligence Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs, India, 25 June 1948,
M/O States Political 373-P/48, NAI.

>The resignation of members of the Socialist Party from the Congress is a
major event in our domestic politics. However most of us might view this,
there is a general regret that many old Congress men should have found
it necessary to leave the old moorings. From every other point of view it is
desirable that nothing could be said or done to add to the rift that has been
created. The times are too critical for us to add to our differences and our
difficulties.[^/93]

To Nehru and Patel alike, the Socialists had abandoned ship. The
history of the Socialist Party after its departure is as varied as the
disparate leaders in the movement; each embarked on different paths
to oppose Congress. My purpose here is not to follow them and evaluate
their 'success' or 'failure' as opponents of the regime. More important
is the fact that they, despite having fought for independence alongside
Congress, were now political opponents as their, relatively moderate,
brand of class politics did not fit with Congress policy.

# '_Yeh azaadi jhooti hai_!'

On 27 September 1947 at the inaugural meeting of the _Cominform_[^cominform],
or alliance of world Communism, Andrei Zhdanov, a prominent Soviet
theoretician, proposed a change in Communist political strategy to be
applied in the foreign policy of the Soviet Union and the domestic
policies of all abiding national Communist parties across the globe.
The time had come to refrain from allying with bourgeois nationalist
movements and to adopt a more confrontational political line. His
was a call to arms against 'class enemies': bureaucrats, landlords,
big business proprietors, and those he called the 'toadies' of Anglo--American imperialism.[^/94] It took the Communist Party of India six
months to adopt this approach at its annual conference in Calcutta.[^/95]
This was not a sudden change. The Communist Party of India's public
reactions to the action of the Indian state had gradually become
more and more angry and intolerant in the previous six months.[^/96]
Under Ranadive's leadership the resolutions passed at the conference
and the lack of opposition mounted against them suggest that
by 28 February 1948, the arguments of Zhdanov and Ranadive
rang true throughout the Communist movement in India. In the
eyes of Indian Communists, the world was indeed divided between
democratic nations, led by the shining example of the Soviet Union,
and imperialist countries, led by the collective might of Anglo--American power. More importantly, the Indian state, through its
actions in Telangana, its so-called appeasement of communalism, its
unsympathetic attitude to labour, and its exclusionary policies towards
the Communist Party, led Communists to believe that the country was
firmly in the grip of 'Anglo--American' control. It was thus deemed the
time to declare war and proclaim, '_Yeh azaadi jhooti hai_!'.[^/97]

[^cominform]: Cominform --- The Information Bureau of the Communist and Workers' Parties, commonly known as Cominform a coordination body of Marxist-Leninist communist parties in Europe during the early Cold War, formed in part as a replacement of the Communist International. Cominform was dissolved during de-Stalinization in 1956.

[^/93]: Jawaharlal Nehru to Premiers, 1 April 1948. Gopal, _Selected Works of Jawaharlal
Nehru_, pp. 338--339.

[^/94]: _The Communist_, November 1947.

[^/95]: _See_ 'The Constitution of the Communist Party of India adopted in the Second
Congress of the Communist Party of India held in Calcutta in 1948'. Basu, J. (1997).
_Documents of the Communist Movement in India, Volume 5_, National Book Agency, Calcutta,
pp. 724--738.

[^/96]: _See_ 'Communist Statement of Policy, For the struggle for full independence
and peoples' democracy', Resolution on the present political situation passed by the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of India at its meeting in Bombay, 7--16
December 1947. _Ibid_., pp. 521--532. 'On the present policy and tasks of the Communist
Party of India', January 1948. _Ibid_. p. 533.

This was a call to arms. Many Communists responded by exhorting
violence. According to the government, the Communist Party
published pamphlets urging people to fight Congress 'dalals' (pimps),
gave instructions on bomb-making, and taught the best techniques
to cut telegraph wires.[^/98] However, the actual violence committed
against the state was fairly sporadic, limited to Assam, Bihar, Madras,
Bengal, and guerrilla warfare in the villages of Telangana.[^/99] Before
many Communists got a chance to respond, the police disrupted
party units throughout the country. Additionally, individual provincial
governments began a systematic round-up of all Communists. Bengal
took the lead in beginning an anti-Communist campaign in March 1948. It banned the West Bengal Communist Party, seized its press,
and curtailed assemblies of more than five. Two hundred arrests were
made immediately in the state. The West Bengal government acted
without consulting the Centre. Nehru wrote to his sister of his surprise:
'Three days ago West Bengal Government declared Communist Party
illegal and arrested a number of prominent Communist workers. This
was done curiously enough without any intimation to us and we learnt
of it from newspapers next morning. Explanation was that news was
in danger of leaking out and hence quick action was necessary.'[^/100]
The state governments of Delhi, Madras, Bombay, Assam, and Punjab
followed West Bengal's example and raided Communist Party and
trade union offices and closed down their presses.[^/101] The reaction of
labour was not as easy to curtail. On 2 April 1948, 20% of the
West Bengal government workforce came out on strike. The police
arrested 100 strikers a day until the strike was called off.[^/102] Workers
also came out to protest over these moves against the Communist
Party in Bombay and Mysore, where 20,000 dockers and 20,000
miners struck in the same week.[^/103]

[^/97]: The Communist Party of India was not the only group to decry independence.
On the same day, in a speech to the All India Sugar Factory Workers Conference
at Meerut, Sarat Chandra Bose proclaimed, 'The basic fact that forces itself on our
attention is that India is yet to achieve her independence.' Bose, S. K. (1968). _I Warned
my Countrymen --- Being the Collected Works of Sarat Chandra Bose_, Netaji Research Bureau,
Calcutta.

[^/98]: The Indian government issued a book describing this activity. It is useful for
the prejudice and fear it contains, as well as the photographs and descriptions of
communist literature and 'terror'. _Communist Violence in India_, New Delhi, Ministry of
Home Affairs, Government of India, 1949.

[^/99]: _See_ British Commonwealth Affairs --- India --- Weekly appreciation by UK High
Commissioner, L/WS/1/1597, 1948, OIOC; British Commonwealth Affairs --- India
--- Weekly appreciation by UK High Commissioner, 1949, L/WS/1/1598, OIOC;
Communist Survey L/PJ/12/432, OIOC.

The government reacted by stepping up its campaign to demonize
the party supported by the striking labour force --- the Communists.
In this atmosphere ministers continued to remind Indians, and
especially Indian workers, that the Communists were an anti-democratic 'fifth column' acting for the interests of the Soviet Union.
To the litany of charges against this opposition party they also added
that the Communists were veering towards unprincipled communal
and secessionist politics at the first opportunity. For example, a
government publication on the history of Communism in India
explicitly stated that when Gandhi died, Communists were asked to
encourage Rashtra Swayam Sevak members to wreak vengeance on
Congressmen and be ready to launch an armed revolution amidst the
chaos.[^/104] When talks broke down between the Nizam's regime and
the Indian state, the government accused the Communists of being
communal in their interests in opposing the new Indian state. Indian
intelligence reported that,

[^/100]: Jawaharlal Nehru to Vijayalakshmi Pandit, 31 March 1948. Gopal, _Selected Works
of Jawaharlal Nehru_, p. 349.

[^/101]: British Commonwealth Affairs --- India --- Weekly appreciation by UK High
Commissioner, 26 March --- 2 April 1948; April 2--9 1948, L/WS/1/1597, OIOC.

[^/102]: _Ibid_.

[^/103]: _Ibid_.

[^/104]: _A History of the Communist Party of India, Volume 2_, 1945--1951, Government of
India, New Delhi, 1963.

>The lifting of the five year ban on the Hyderabad Communist Party has led to
the suggestion that the Nizam's government is attempting to gain the support
of the Communists against the Government of India. Some weight is lent to
this suggestion by the pamphlet published by the Communist Party which
apparently criticises the Nehru government as a 'government of capitalists'
and states that the object of the Congress in demanding the ascension of
Hyderabad to the Indian union is to throw the State open to exploitation by
Indian capitalists.[^/105]

The Madras government was also reported to be 'partly responsible
for the certain situation that has arisen by their own part in toleration
of communist activities in this area so long as those activities were
directed against Hyderabad'.[^/106] Two deeper processes were at work
here. First, the Madras and Hyderabad governments incarcerated or
released Communists in order to antagonize and disrupt each other's
government. Their actions had nothing to do with the Communists'
own political or criminal activity. Secondly, the statement suggests
that the Communists, in 'supporting' the Nizam, were practising
communal politics --- the bogey in 'secular' India. This attitude did not
stop in Hyderabad. It resurfaced again and again. For example, the
British high commissioner iterated that, 'One East Punjab minister
declared that the Communists had a hand in the assassination
of Gandhi and were also responsible in some measure for the
bloodshed in Punjab as they had been conducting propaganda in
favour of Pakistan.'[^/107] The government also blamed Communists for
encouraging the politics of cessation, having supported the case for
Pakistan and linked up with political activists in the northeast. For
example, the chief minister of Assam warned, 'The only solid party in
Manipur is the Communist Party. I have definite information that the
Naga National Council is being instigated by the Communists to cut
its connection with the Dominion of India.'[^/108] These accusations were
to continue long after the first year of independence. For example,
Communists were condemned for their activity in Kashmir. In 1949,
the British high commissioner reported that,

[^/105]: Communism in India, Weekly appreciation by UK High Commissioner, 3--9
May 1948, L/PJ/12/772, OIOC.

[^/106]: Communism in India, Weekly appreciation by UK High Commissioner, 10--16
May 1948, L/PJ/12/772, OIOC.

[^/107]: Communism in India, Weekly appreciation by UK High Commissioner, 12 April
1948, L/PJ/12/772, OIOC.

[^/108]: Gopinath Bordoloi, Chief Minister Assam to Sardar Vallabhai Patel, 26 May 1948. Das, Sardar Patel's Correspondence, p. 122.

>There is reason to believe that they (Communists) are active in Kashmir,
where one if not two members of the Sheikh Abdullah's government are
known communists and Sheikh Abdullah himself if not actually a fellow
traveller tends to the extreme left in his views. The Kashmir militia is
organised on communist lines and is communist controlled.[^/109]

In the same year secret surveillance reports claimed that the Muslim
National Guards in Old Delhi were 'gradually coming under the
influence of the Communists'.[^/110]

Such ostracization of the Communists draws parallels with the ways
in which the colonial state had on occasion used the Communists
to frighten Indians into steadfast loyalty to the Raj.[^/111] Congress
ministers, adept in mimicking colonial policy and thought, were
playing the same game. They had pushed the Communists to the
periphery of politics in the new state and were attempting to burden
them with the blame for all opposition and grievances against the
regime, despite its disparate and varied nature.

# Conclusion

By 1948 the government had succeeded in marginalizing the
Communist Party of India. It was too weak to lead revolutionary action
against the state but, thanks to its zealous activists and government
exaggeration, it had a public image that far outweighed its numerical
strength. It was thus not shocking nor considered undemocratic to
declare all-out war on the Communists. In April 1948 Mr Gadgil, the
Dominion minister of works, mines, and power, warned Communists
and Socialists 'that if they acted in any way detrimental to the well
being of the country, the government of India would not merely indulge
in expressions of moral platitudes but would liquidate those who
were out to create disorder'.[^/112] Such language had enduring effects.
For example, a year later, when addressing the Madras Chamber of
Commerce, Sardar Patel explained to an audience of Congressmen
that, 'Communism was a monster that is raising its head. It will leave
nothing for you, neither culture nor freedom if it is not checked.'[^/113]
He also issued a chilly warning to an audience in Hyderabad that, 'I
shall not allow one Communist to remain alive because it will poison
not only the State but the whole of India.'[^/114] By now Nehru was singing
from the same hymn sheet. At a public meeting in Orissa in early 1949,
he raged against the Communists who were, in his eyes, deliberately
wrecking trains to bring about mass starvation and terror and dislodge
India's national life. He asked the question, 'Can anybody believe that
those who were capable of such atrocities and who owed allegiance to a
centre outside the country do any good to the people of this country?'[^/115]

[^/109]: Communism in India, Weekly appreciation by UK High Commissioner,
23 February 1949, L/PJ/12/772, OIOC.

[^/110]: Intelligence Bureau Report, 11 July 1949 in Delhi Police (V Inst) F. No. 61,
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library (NMML).

[^/111]: Sharma, S. (2010). _Radical Politics in Late-Colonial Punjab: Sedition and Governance_,
Routledge, London, p. 25.

[^/112]: Communism in India, Weekly appreciation by UK High Commissioner, 12 April
1948, L/PJ/12/772, OIOC.

Nehru's words might be seen as bluff and bluster against political
opposition in an era when general elections based on universal suffrage
were about to be held. And the Communists themselves were no less
accusatory or hostile in their charges against the Congress leaders of
the new independent state. However, in this conflict the government
had the power of the state, the legislation, and the majority of the press
on its side. The opinions of ministers were far more powerful than
those of the outlawed left, especially because its extreme elements
were alienating its own constituents, the labouring poor. Thus, before
his death on 15 December 1950, Sardar Patel was able to push through
the Preventive Detention Bill. He described it as the minimum evil
necessary to safeguard democratic institutions in India from the
communist 'menace'. As he said,

>Our fight is not with Communism or with those who believe in the theory
of Communism but with those whose avowed object is to create disruption,
dislocation, tampering with communications, suborn loyalty of the people and
make it impossible for normal Government to function. Obviously we cannot
deal with them under the provisions of ordinary law.[^/116]

It is not remarkable that Patel singled out the Communists
when introducing the Bill. Of all the enemies of the Indian nation,
Communist methods and ideology represented the worst of them to
Patel and his cohorts. Communist cadres, less than 10,000 strong in
1947, could not hold out against the war unleashed against them. They
had borne the brunt of government hostility because they had shown
that they held sway over so much of the Indian workforce. In 1951,
their numbers were depleted and their hold over unions attenuated,
they returned to electoral politics, cap in hand, to play the role of
opposition to Congress, as the Socialists had opted to do three years
before.[^/117] Communist Party candidates stood for election throughout
India. They campaigned for their Party, roused the crowds at hustings,
and jostled for the Indian electorate's vote. They had learned that the
only way to do politics in the new state was the Congress way. By virtue
of being the largest nationalist movement, Congress had the mandate
of the people and had laid down the parameters of acceptable politics.

[^/113]: British Commonwealth Affairs --- India --- Weekly appreciation by UK High
Commissioner, February 1949, L/WS/1/1598, OIOC.

[^/114]: British Commonwealth Affairs --- India --- Weekly appreciation by UK High
Commissioner, 24 February --- 4 March 1949, L/WS/1/1598, OIOC.

[^/115]: British Commonwealth Affairs --- India --- Weekly appreciation by UK High
Commissioner, 10--17 March 1949, L/WS/1/1598, OIOC.

[^/116]: _Communism Betrayed in India_, Tagore Memorial Publication, 1950, p. 59.

Congress leaders did not become constitutional statesmen overnight
on 15 August 1947. Neither did their counterparts in the Congress
Socialist Party and the Communist Party of India. However, in Sardar
Patel and Jawaharlal Nehru, Congress had leaders who had become
astute about electoral politics far sooner than their counterparts.
They continued to direct who could and who could not represent the
nationalist movement at the electoral polls, just as they had in previous
elections in the Raj. This movement began before independence had
been won: from 1945 against the Communists and 1947 against the
Socialists. This paper has illustrated that Congress leaders invested
time and thought into how to remove groups who represented the
interests of the 'working class' from the Indian National Congress.
This process was not simply directed from above by the puppeteer
Patel. This paper has shown how the process played out in other parts
of India. In Bombay, local Congress conflicts with the increasingly
popular Socialists gave the national Congress leaders the excuse to
push Socialists out of their organization. Similarly, the government
of Bengal was the first to implement action against Communists,
propelling the rest of the country to follow suit. The reason behind
these actions is not the issue here. The Congress, as a political
party, could justifiably bar its members who chose to stand against
it in elections. Similarly, a newly entrenched state had to deal with
the incendiary action of the Communist Party after it declared war
in 22 February 1948. What is more significant is that Congress
actions and the Congress-led Indian state drove away the same
parties who had fought with them and for them in the years before
independence. The process by which Congress --- both Nehru's soft
Congress and Patel's right --- alienated its former allies on the left
is crucial when looking at the construction of the categories of
government and opposition in independent India. By focusing on
the 12 months around independence, it becomes clearer what was
to become acceptable and unacceptable in the discourse of the new
Indian polity. Under Congress, during this decisive and neglected
period, the state developed a democracy that rested on coercion as
much as consent.

[^/117]: Communist Party of India membership fell from 89,000 to 10,000 during
this period. Rajimwale, A. (2005). _Glimpses of History through Party Congresses_, People's
Publishing House, New Delhi, p. 48.

