Discussion of the social aspects of industrialization in India has proceeded
almost exclusively in terms of labor recruitment, factory conditions, and
the development of trade unions. Although strikes have received detailed
consideration, the industrial violence which formed a common and persistent
feature of labor relations in colonial India has been largely ignored.
Official reports of the period tended to play down the incidence of violence,
not wishing to publicize the failings of government labor policies.[^/1] Or,
where violence was acknowledged to have occurred, it was taken to indicate
the immaturity and irresponsibility of Indian workers. Post-independence
studies, drawing heavily on published official sources, have too readily
equated labor history with a narrative of strikes, with union membership
figures and labor legislation. A lingering Gandhian tradition has further
influenced many Indian labor studies. Violence is regarded as too morally
reprehensible and politically deviant to warrant serious analysis. Where
admitted, it is attributed to communist politicians or other outside elements
rather than to factors inherent within the labor situation.[^/2]

Violence in Indian industry was not confined to an awkward early phase
of industrialization before workers had alternative means of self-expression.
It persisted despite the creation and legal recognition of trade unions,
despite the formal establishment of machinery for the peaceful resolution
of labor disputes. The effect of these innovations was often to create new,
but no less violent, conflict situations. From sudden attacks on management
personnel inside the factories, violence shifted to confrontations
outside the factory gates between strikers and the opposing blacklegs,
police and troops. Nor, in spite of growing left-wing influence, was this the
revolutionary violence of a proletariat striving to replace industrial capitalism
with a new socio-economic order. The closest Western parallel is to be
found in the machine-breaking and "collective bargaining by riot" of
eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century industrial workers in Britain.[^/3] But
whereas in many Western countries the legal recognition of trade unions
and the right to picket greatly reduced workers' dependence on violence to
express their grievances and urge their demands, in India this development
was thwarted by the colonial and racial context of industrial labor. Indeed,
the gulf between workers' expectations of unions and strikes and the
minimal level of labor activity tolerated by management and government
created an atmosphere of bitterness and frustration more conducive to
violence than to peaceful solutions.

[^/1]: In this submission to the Royal Commission on Labor, the Railway Board listed 48 strikes
for the 1919--29 period, but noted serious violence in only 3 of them, with minor violence in 5
others: _Royal Commission on Labour in India_ (hereafter _RCL_) (London: His Majesty's
Stationery Office, 1931), VIII, part 1, pp. 250--58. Examination of strikes for which no violence
was listed shows many incidents of violence of the kinds discussed in this paper.

[^/2]: For example, in V. B. Karnik, _Strikes in India_ (Bombay: Manaktalas, 1967), p. 216,
commenting on violence during the South Indian Railway strike, 1928.

In any given dispute it might be possible to find specific grievances and
immediate causes to account for the incidence of industrial violence. But
they would explain the spark, rarely the combustibility. The purpose here is
to trace industrial violence back to its underlying causes, to the factors
which disposed workers to express themselves through violent, rather than
peaceful, means. Three main factors were involved, though not all were
necessarily operative simultaneously or with equal prominence. First, rural
India had a tradition of often violent protest against perceived injustice,
and this was imported into the industrial setting by immigrant rural
laborers. The transference of violence from the countryside to industrial
towns is not uncommon in predominantly peasant societies. But it deserves
to be stressed in the Indian context in view of the assumptions often made
about the fatalism and passivity of India's rural poor, and in view, too, of
the divergence between popular traditions of violent protest and political
norms of Gandhian non-violence.

Second, the "law and order" priorities of the colonial state gave little
room for the development of effective trade unionism before independence
in 1947, and thus inhibited workers from finding peaceful solutions for
their grievances. Police and magisterial intervention often negated what
might otherwise have been successful strike action; and even when, in the
late 1920s, the government and many industrialists came to favor unionization,
it was as an aid to controlling the workers. Unions were unable,
therefore, to function in a way that gave satisfactory expression to workers'
attitudes and demands.

Third, both intra-class and inter-class conflict were exacerbated by
racial, linguistic and social differences. In the extreme form of inter-class
antagonism, where European managers and supervisors had little understanding
of the language and culture of their Indian workers, industrial
violence sprang from mutual incomprehension or took the form of retaliation
for the physical threats and abuse of Europeans. The racial divide
could also split the work force itself. The comparatively privileged position
of European and Eurasian workers was deeply resented by Indians, and
was often a root cause of violence, especially when the former refused to
participate in Indians' unions and strikes.

[^/3]: E. J. Hobsbawm, "The Machine Breakers," in _Labouring Men: Studies in the History of
Labour_ (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1964), pp. 5--22.

Although the arguments advanced here are intended to have a general
applicability to India (and to invite comparison with other colonial territories),
the principal illustrations are drawn from the Madras Presidency of
southern India. The main focus is on the railroads, in India, as in many
other colonial and semi-colonial areas, one of the largest employers of
industrial labor. Out of some four million industrial workers in India in the
1920s, nearly 900,000 worked for the railroads, rather more than were
employed in textile mills. In the Madras Presidency in the early 1920s, there
were approximately 32,000 employees involved in railroad administration
and services, 22,000 manual laborers, and 16,000 workers in the mechanical
and engineering workshops.[^/4] There were two main railroad systems in
the province, the South Indian Railway and the Madras and Southern
Mahratta Railway. India in the 1920s was second only to the United States
of America in miles of track, and the railroads were of primary economic
and military importance to the British colonial regime.

# I

Much has been written about the traditional origins of Gandhi's _ahimsa_
(non-violence) and _satyagraha_ (non-violent resistance).[^/5] Certain religious
and social communities no doubt prided themselves on their attachment to
_ahimsa_ --- Jains and Brahmins, for example. But for most Indians non-violence
would appear to have been no more than a tactic, abandoned in favor
of violent action once it had proved ineffective. In an instance of this,
villagers at Urappanur in the Madurai district of Madras in 1862 first
opposed the diversion of water from a channel which irrigated their fields
by appealing to the District Collector. Failing to reach him in time, they sat
down on the bank of the channel to prevent Public Works Department
laborers from making the breach that would deprive them of their customary
water supply. After an hour, when the police moved in to remove the
villagers bodily, the protesters jumped to their feet and began to pelt the
police with the stones that they had kept concealed ready for such an
eventuality.[^/6] Thus, both passive and violent resistance were used by middle
and rich peasants, and sometimes local landlords too, to resist the infringement
of customary rights or excessive tax demands by superior landlords
and the state.

[^/4]: _Census of India: Madras, 1921_ (Madras: Government Press, 1922), XIII, part 2, pp.
198--99; _Madras Presidency Administration Report, 1924--5_ (Madras: Government Press,
1925), p. 130.

[^/5]: E.g., A. L. Bashyam, "Traditional Influences on the Thought of Mahatma Gandhi," in R.
Kumar, ed., _Essays on Gandhian Politics: The Rowlatt Satyagraha of 1919_ (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1971), pp. 17--42; Howard Spodek, "On the Origins of Gandhi's Political Methodology:
The Heritage of Kathiawad and Gujarat," _Journal of Asian Studies_, 30: 2 (February 1971),
361--72.

The argument that middle peasants are particularly disposed to rebellion
is now a familiar one. It is usually accompanied by observations on the
dependence, and hence disinclination to rebel, of poor peasants and landless
laborers --- unless their normal shackles of restraint have been struck
from them by a major political or military upheaval.[^/7] Nowhere has the
apparent dependence and lack of "tactical power" of the rural poor been
more emphasized than in India. Their position at the base of the caste
hierarchy, with its attendant ideology of high-caste social and ritualsupremacy,
their reliance on wealthier villagers for employment and a share of the
harvest or for customary dues for their services (the _jajmani_ system), their
long history of agrestic slavery and serfdom[^/8] --- all these have made it
possible for scholars to conclude that the rural poor were "too weak, and
helpless, and socially fragmented, to offer any resistance, either to their
immediate superiors, or to the State."[^/9]

The poor did not, as a rule, seek to overturn the established social order,
but they were not so weak and divided as to remain supine in the face of
what they perceived as injustice. Their protests might form part of broader
movements of rural revolt, such as the Rebellion of 1857--58 in northern
India. At other times their economic interests and social expectations ran
counter to those of their rural superiors. Then there were strikes against
employing landlords and rich peasants over the division of the harvest, or
the untouchables and low castes refused to perform such customary tasks
as the removal of dead animals. The effectiveness of such action, generally
confined to the defense of existing rights rather than the assertion of new
demands, was limited, especially where solidarity with fellow caste
members and laborers in neighboring villages was lacking,[^/10] but should not
be dismissed as insignificant.

[^/6]: Judicial Proceedings, no. 90, 13 February 1862, Tamil Nadu Archives, Madras (hereafter
T.N.A.).

[^/7]: Hamza Alavi, "Peasants and Revolution," in Ralph Miliband and John Saville, eds., _The
Socialist Register_, 1965 (London: Merlin Press, 1965), pp. 241--77; Eric R. Wolf, _Peasant Wars
of the Twentieth Century_ (London: Faber, 1971), pp. 290--92.

[^/8]: The literature on this subject is vast, but see especially, Dharma Kumar, _Land and Caste in
South India: Agricultural Labour in the Madras Presidency during the Nineteenth Century_
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1965); Scarlett Epstein, "Productive Efficiency and
Customary Systems of Rewards in Rural South India," in Raymond Firth, ed., _Themes in
Economic Anthropology_, A.S.A. Monograph no 6 (London: Tavistock Publications, 1967),
pp. 229--52; and, more generally, Barrington Moore Jr., _Social Origins of Dictatorship and
Democracy: Lord and Peasant in the Making of the Modern World_ (London: Allen Lane,
1967), pp. 330--41, 378--85.

[^/9]: Ravinder Kumar, "The Transformation of Rural Protest in India," in S. C. Malik, ed.,
Dissent, _Protest and Reform in Indian Civilization_ (Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study,
1977), p. 272.

A more active form of rural protest --- looting by landless laborers, village
artisans, and poor peasants --- occurred during periods of high food prices
and incipient famine. This almost certainly had a long history, but may well
have been on the increase during the second half of the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries, a time of frequent and widespread famine and an
expanding, speculative grain trade. Formerly, landlords and rich peasants
distributed part of their grain reserves to dependent laborers and artisans
during periods of dearth, partly to be sure of their services in subsequent
years, partly because charity towards the poor was considered virtuous and
enjoined by religion. But as producers became increasingly involved in
commercial grain marketing, and as an expanding population made the
rural labor supply more plentiful, affluent villagers showed reluctance to
distribute grain to the needy. In a fashion resembling that of eighteenth-century
England or colonial Burma and Vietnam,[^/11] India's rural poor
resisted this violation of a traditional "moral economy." Their indignation
took the form of looting in village and small town markets and raids on the
houses of grajn-traders, moneylenders and landlords. Of short duration,
such incidents could nonetheless be singularly effective in forcing either a
temporary reduction in grain prices or the charitable distribution of foodstuffs
by landlords and traders who feared further attacks. Resistance to
the looters was rare; and to the comparative anonymity of a sudden pillage
of the bazaar, or the darkness and confusion of a midnight raid, was added
the reluctance of villagers to cooperate with the police. The latter usually
arrived too late to catch looters red-handed. Arrests were few; convictions
fewer. Dacoity (gang robbery) was another variant. Dacoits might be
outlawed or impoverished members of locally dominant castes; but, particularly
during periods of high prices and famine, poor peasants and
landless laborers joined in or formed their own gangs. Unpopular moneylenders,
landlords, and traders were again primary targets of attack, and
retribution was as pronounced a characteristic of such dacoity as famineinduced
panic and hunger. [^/12]

Obviously the rural poor were not in a state of perpetual turbulence,
constantly at war with their masters and creditors. But, particularly during
subsistence crises, they were capable of collective protest or broke away
from their customary subordination to participate in organized crime. It
would seem likely, too, that the violent reputation of some untouchable
and low-caste groups protected them from even greater oppression. Force
and the threat of violent retribution, even more than the withdrawal of
labor, provided the rural poor with a limited degree of "tactical power."

[^/10]: Thomas O. Beidelman, _A Comparative Analysis of the Jajmani System_ (New York:
Association for Asian Studies, 1959), pp. 61--64; André Béteille, _Castes, Old and New: Essays
in Social Structure and Social Stratification_ (Bombay: Asia Publishing House, 1969), pp. 101, 188.

[^/11]: " E. P. Thompson, "The Moral Economy of the English Crowd in the Eighteenth Century,"
_Past and Present_, 50 (February 1971), 76--136; James C. Scott, _The Moral Economy of
the Peasant: Rebellion and Subsistence in Southeast Asia_ (New Haven: Yale University Press,
1976).

[^/12]: David Arnold, "Dacoity and Rural Crime in Madras, 1860--1940," _Journal of Peasant
Studies_ 6: 2 (January 1979), 140--67.

How were these rural traditions transmitted to modern industry?
Although the composition of the industrial labor force varied from region
to region, even from one industry to another, the bulk of industrial workers
came from the rural poor --- untouchables, tribals, low-caste laborers and
artisans, poor peasants of various castes. Usually they were driven to seek
factory employment by famine, indebtedness, land scarcity, and the decline
of such traditional industries as handloom weaving. Among the railroad
workers of the Madras Presidency, skilled and unskilled workers were
drawn mainly from middle and poor peasant castes along with a large
contingent of untouchables. Indian Christians, Muslims and members of
artisan communities were present in lesser numbers.[^/13] Although the railroads
of Madras, like those of the Bengal and Bombay presidencies, dated
from the 1850s, there was a substantial expansion of the work force in the
closing years of the nineteenth century and the early years of the twentieth.
Employees on the open lines rose from about 12,000 in 1881 to 33,500 in
1911; workshop employees probably increased more rapidly over the same
period. Many of the industrial workers, at least until the 1920s, were thus
first or second generation immigrants from the countryside. Morris D.
Morris has persuasively argued against the old assumption that Indian
factory workers were not "committed" to industrial employment and
retained a semi-rural identity. But it should not be concluded in consequence
that they abandoned rural social values, or forms of protest, once
they entered the factory gates. As Dipesh Chakraborty has demonstrated
for jute-mill workers in Calcutta in the 1890s upcountry immigrants often
brought with them their old ways and might assert them with greater vigor
in a new, still-unfamiliar, industrial environment. [^/14]

In the period before the widespread unionization of industrial workers in
1918--20, traditional forms of protest prevailed in the industrial context
while organized strikes remained comparatively rare. Workers' participation
in food riots was one illustration of this. Railroad laborers, whose
pay was in arrears, reacted to high grain prices and the refusal of traders to
extend them credit, by looting the bazaars in Cuddalore, South Arcot, on
Christmas Day 1876. It was a time when rising prices and fear of famine
sparked off similar demonstrations in the markets of other towns and
villages of the province.[^/15] In the second half of 1918 food riots and looting
again swept through the Madras Presidency. Beginning in the rice-growing
deltas of the Krishna and Godavari rivers in May, the disturbances reached
the working-class areas in the north of Madras city in early September. In
this case the spill-over from the countryside to the city is clear. During the
three days of looting and rioting that followed, workers from the city's
cotton mills and rail workshops were among the principal participants.[^/16]
At Arkonam, North Arcot, and Nagappattinam, Thanjavur, railroad
workers were also involved in incidents of actual or threatened looting. [^/17]

[^/13]: Census of India: Madras, 1921, XIII, part 2, pp. 257, 315--16, 325. Cf. Ranajit Das Gupta,
"Factory Labour in Eastern India: Sources of Supply, 1855--1946," _Indian Economic and
Social History Review_, 13: 3 (July-September 1976), 277--330.

[^/14]: Morris D. Morris, _The Emergence of an Industrial Labor Force in India: A Study of the
Bombay Cotion Mills, 1854--1947_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1965); Dipesh
Chakraborty, "Communal Riots and Labour: Bengals Jute Mill Hands in the 1890s," paper
presented at the Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Calcutta, October, 1976.

A further link between rural and industrial protest was "train-wrecking"
--- the sabotage of railroad tracks by the removal of rails and fish-plates
or the placing of obstructions across the lines. All over India, both before
and after the advent of organized unions, aggrieved railmen used this
technique to put pressure on the management or to avenge themselves for
what they felt to be wrongful dismissal. Most commonly the "trainwreckers"
were the gangmen and plate-layers who labored on the lines, had
access to the tools needed, and lived in villages alongside the tracks. In this
respect "train-wrecking" was primarily the protest form of the semi-proletarianized
section of the rail workers. Like food riots and famine dacoity it
had the advantages of virtual anonymity. It did not depend for its effectiveness
on solidarity with other workers; and implicitly it showed little faith in
the capacity of unions or negotiations with management to redress grievances.[^/18]

Two further points should be noted here. Up to about 1920 industrial
protest tended to reflect the rhythms, as well as the character, of rural
protest, swelling in years of high food prices, often taking the form of food
riots and looting, then dying away in years of cheaper, more plentiful grain.
During this early period, before extensive unionization, industrial violence,
like most protest, tended to be "reactive" rather than "proactive."[^/19] It was
directed not towards attaining new demands, such as higher wages or
shorter hours, but to the defense of existing work practises, established
wage levels and hours of work. Employees at the Madras and Southern
Mahratta Railway's Perambur workshops stopped work in May 1898 to
protest the reduction of their hours (and hence pay) during a period of high
prices and near famine. Workers in the same establishment rioted in
December 1913 in opposition to unpopular administrative changes, particularly
a new clocking-in procedure which in effect shortened the rest
break and threatened heavy fines for lateness.[^/20] After 1920 and before 1947
there were no further major outbreaks of grain rioting, and industrial
unrest increasingly reflected problems specific to the urban labor force:
retrenchment, demands for higher pay, improved promotion prospects,
and so forth. It is thus possible to see in south India a transition, like that in
Europe at an earlier date,[^/21] from attacks on traders to demands, expressed
through unions and strikes, for concessions from the industrial management.

[^/15]: W. Francis, _Madras District Gazetteers: South Arcot_ (Madras: Government Press,
1906), pp. 181--82; _Madras Police Administration Report, 1876_ (Madras: Foster, 1877),
appendix C, p. xvii.

[^/16]: G\[overnment\] O\[rder\] 2303, Home (Judicial), 11 October 1918, T.N.A.; David Arnold,
"Looting, Grain Riots and Government Policy in South India, 1918," _Past and Present_ 84
(August 1979): 111--45.

[^/17]: _Hindu (Madras)_, 14 September 1918; G.O. 1446, Revenue (Special), 29 July 1919,
T.N.A.

[^/18]: Sabotage on the Madras and Southern Mahratta Railway between early August and late
October 1920 was attributed to gangmen angered by the management's refusal to meet their
union's demands and the defeat of their strike in June: Under-Secretary's Secret File, 308B, 29
November 1920, T.N.A. For a discussion of the phenomenon, see Dipesh Chakraborty,
"Early Railwaymen in India: Dacoity and Train-Wrecking (c. 1860--1900)," in _Essays in
Honour of Prof. S. C. Sarkar_ (New Delhi: People's Publishing House, 1976), pp. 523--50.

Second, from the viewpoint of the employers and the government, the
sabotage and destruction which accompanied many industrial disputes was
wholly "irrational." Often workers' demands were not formulated and
presented to the management before violence exploded, and its occurrence
was more likely to obstruct than to assist the resolution of a dispute. Both
the railroad's managing agent and the magistrate who investigated the 1913
Perambur riot could see no rational explanation for such a furious outbreak.
It began abruptly when workmen who had refused to follow the new
clocking-in procedure after the midday break learned that they were to be
fined half an hour's pay. Workers in the carpentry shops then began to
throw their mallets at the European supervisory staff: a hail of bricks, bolts,
nuts and iron bars followed. The workmen broke open a box of sledgehammer
handles and, thus armed, chased and threatened every European they
could find, broke windows and smashed office furniture.[^/22] Apart from
racial hostility (a factor discussed below), this explosiveness shows the
same spontaneous anger and impulse for revenge to be found in rural
looting and food riots. It also suggests an underlying hostility to the
industrial environment --- to its discipline, its seemingly arbitrary penalties,
its high-handed supervisory staff --- which could only find expression in
periodic violence against property and management personnel. Here was
an enduring and violent alienation.

[^/19]: Charles Tilly, Louise Tilly and Richard Tilly, _The Rebellious Century_, 1830--1930
(London: Dent, 1975), pp. 50--51.

[^/20]: _Madras Police Administration Report, 1898_ (Madras: Government Press, 1899), pp. 3,
142; G.O. 195, Judicial, 27 January 1914, T.N.A.

[^/21]: Cf. Gaston V. Rimlinger, "The Legitimation of Protest: A Comparative Study in Labor
History," _Comparative Studies in Society and History_, 2: 3 (April 1960), pp. 331--3; Charles
Tilly, "The Changing Place of Collective Violence", in Melvin Richter, ed., _Essays in Theory
and History: An Approach to the Social Sciences_ (Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1970), pp. 139--64.

[^/22]: G.O. 195, Judicial, 27 January 1914; G.O. 1303, Judicial, 5 June 1914, T.N.A.

Having thus sketched the rural origins of labor violence and its transference
to the industrial work force, it is now possible to advance a stage
further to show by reference to a specific example, the South Indian
Railway strike of 1928, how violence of this kind occurred despite the
attempts of union leaders and outside politicians to pursue non-violent
tactics.

All the available evidence points to the determination of the strike
organizers --- both the railroad workers who formed the executive of the
South Indian Railway Labor Union and their two communist advisers,
M. Singaravelu Chetti of Madras and Mukundalal Sircar from Bengal --- to
hold a completely non-violent strike. After protracted negotiations with
the railroad's Agent, they had failed to reach agreement on their basic
demands: first, that retrenchment of some three thousand workshop
employees, made redundant by the amalgamation of the three existing
shops (at Nagappattinam, Podanur and Tiruchirapalli) into a single
modernized shop at Golden Rock, should not proceed until guarantees of
either re-employment or adequate lay-off benefits were given; and, second,
that the wages of the lowest-paid employees, the gangmen, should be raised
from Rupees 11--13, to Rs. 15--25. There were two phases to the strike. It
began with a sit-in by men at the workshops on the morning of 28 June
1928, which, when the management closed the premises at lunchtime,
became a lockout lasting for a month. The second phase started at midnight
of July 19 when laborers throughout the South Indian Railway
system stopped work. Out of a total labor force of 37,000, an estimated
17,000 to 20,000 joined the strike by sitting on the rails to obstruct trains or
by absenting themselves from work.[^/23]

Both before and during the strike the leaders warned workers that if their
agitation were to succeed they must avoid all violence, which would
alienate the public and trigger government repression. As in many other
strikes of the 1920s, the leaders tried to legitimize their campaign by
couching it in Gandhian terms, calling both the workshop sit-in and the
obstruction of trains _satyagraha_. This was in spite of Gandhi's own pronouncement,
made in 1926 about a proposed sit-in at Nagappattinam, that
_satyagraha_ was "unlawful" in that form.[^/24] But, despite the careful organization
and propaganda of the leaders, the strike plunged into violence
almost as soon as it was extended from the workshops to the open lines. On
July 20 and 21 there were scuffles between strikers and train crews who
defied the strike call. At Tuticorin and Mayuram on July 20 and Villupuram
on July 21 stones were thrown by strikers and railroad stores set on
fire. Three trains were derailed between July 20 and July 23: 3 passengers
were killed and 42 injured. On July 25 the death of 8 passengers in a bus
which collided with locomotive at an unguarded level crossing near
Tiruchirapalli led to a riot in which the engine-driver and fireman narrowly
escaped being burned alive. According to the railroad management, the 10
days before the strike collapsed on July 30 produced 78 cases of obstruction
and sabotage and a loss of Rs. 219,000 in damage to rolling stock, buildings
and tracks.[^/25] Violence and destruction on such a scale had precisely the
consequences the leaders had feared: the middle-class public and politicians
were almost universal in their condemnation; state intervention was
wholly on the side of the management; and the embarrassed leadership had
to abandon the struggle without having gained any of its objectives.

[^/23]: G.O. 2114, Public Works and Labor, 25 August 1928, T.N.A.; _RCL_, VIII, part 1, pp.
173, 588.

[^/24]: _Collected Works of Mahatma_ Gandhi (Delhi: Government of India, 1969), XXXI, p. 454.

The Government of Madras claimed that the two communists involved
had deliberately planned a "programme of destruction" for revolutionary
motives of their own. But this claim was refuted in the Madras High Court
during the trial of fifteen of the strike leaders for conspiracy. The two
European judges found that the leaders --- railroad employees and communists
alike --- had sincerely advocated non-violent tactics. In neither their
public speeches nor their private correspondence was there any indication
that non-violence was merely the camouflage for a campaign of deliberate
violence. The judges pointed out that the sit-in and lockout at the workshops
had been free from sabotage and intimidation and that the areas
nearest the shops were least affected by violence. They concluded that this
was due to the greater control exercised by the leaders at and near the
workshops while violence erupted where their influence was weakest, on
the open lines and among the gangmen. Twelve of the leaders were sentenced
to imprisonment, not for conspiracy to cause damage and foment
violence, but because obstructing trains was an offense under the Railways
Act.[^/26] Further evidence of the responsibility of the gangmen for acts of
sabotage and violence came from other trials. In one case it was established
that the removal of the fish-plates and bolts which caused the
derailment of a train on July 21 was the work of gangmen who had broken
into a gatehouse a few yards from the scene of the accident and stolen the
tools needed.[^/27] Despite the exhortations of the leaders to eschew violence,
many of the workers had clung, or reverted, to the old technique of
"train-wrecking." Others had soon lost patience with _satyagraha_ on the
rails and turned to more familiar, violent, tactics. Inadequate organization
and control by the leadership would only partly explain the strikers'
reversion to violence. The strength and persistence of preindustrial forms
of violent protest provides one explanation; the basic intolerance of the
government and management to any strike action (however non-violent)
offers another.

[^/25]: _Report on Indian Railways, 1928--29_ (Calcutta: Government of India, 1930), I, p. 69;
_Hindu_, 6 August 1928.

[^/26]: G.O. 422, Public, 28 March 1930, T.N.A.

[^/27]: _Hindu_, 24 July 1928.

# II

The divergence so apparent in the South Indian Railway strike, between
the union leaders and their outside advisers on one side and the mass of
workers on the other, was a common feature of labor disputes in India
between the two world wars. Had a more effective trade union movement
developed, labor leaders might have been able to exercise greater control
over the workers and to pursue their objectives more successfully through
disciplined and peaceful strike action.

The unions' limited effectiveness had more than a single cause. Although
workers' associations and unions had existed fitfully since the 1880s and
1890s (the Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants dated from 1897) it
was not until 1918--20 that large numbers of Indian industrial workers were
unionized. The stimulus was rapid inflation and dwindling wage values, but
the leadership of most of the unions formed at the close of World War I
came from nationalist politicians interested in annexing industrial labor to
the Indian National Congress to strengthen its claim to possess a "mass"
base. The involvement of politicians from outside the factory gates was
initially advantageous, for workers faced victimization if they took a
prominent part in union affairs themselves. Politicians had, too, the education
to formulate and the connections to publicize labor grievances. But,
without first-hand experience of industry and with political objectives that
were often at variance with those of the workers, politicians were not
always the ablest or most loyal of labor leaders. By the time Gandhi's first
civil disobedience campaign was called off in February 1922, there was
disillusionment on both sides.

By giving unions legal recognition for the first time, the Indian Trade
Unions Act of 1926 freed members from the threat of prosecution (though
not necessarily of victimization) and encouraged them to be more independent.
Nevertheless, as the South Indian Railway strike showed, politicians
continued to be influential in union affairs when labor unrest revived in the
mid-1920s. This protracted involvement of outsiders tended either to
subordinate workers' interests to external political causes, or to create a rift
between the workers and their nominal spokesmen. At times an outside
union official, called in by the management to explain the cause of a strike
or disturbance, had to hurry along to the factory to investigate discontent
of which he had hitherto been unaware. Some managers refused to negotiate
with union officials who appeared to have so little control over the
workers they claimed to represent.[^/28] Again, as Morris points out,[^/29] Indian
unions were overly ambitious. Most attempted from the outset to represent
workers of all grades in an industry rather than progressing, as in Britain
and the United States, only at a considerably later date from craft-based
associations for skilled workers to mass unions for skilled and unskilled.

Remote union officials and weak control clearly contributed to the
frequency of wildcat strikes and violent outbreaks, at least until more
experienced labor leadership began to develop from within the work force.
But the greatest obstacle to a rapid transition from industrial violence to
effective unionism and negotiation was the attitude of the government.
This is ironic, for the government naturally saw itself as the guardian of
"law and order" and the industrial workers as the source of violent conflict.

Until the advent of provincial autonomy and a popularly-elected Congress
ministry in 1937, the Government of Madras clung to the principle of
_laissez-faire_ in industrial relations, holding that it was not its duty to
interfere in disputes between employer and employee. In the period before
the establishment and recognition of trade unions, it saw its responsibilities
purely in terms of law enforcement. It was, for example, totally disinterested
in the grievances which caused employees at the Nagappattinam rail
workshops to riot in September 1896 --- that was a matter for the management
alone --- but it was greatly concerned at the outbreak of rioting and
sought measures to prevent a further "breach of the peace."[^/30] The storm of
industrial strife which swept the province in 1918--20, and its coincidence
with nationalist agitation, made it difficult for the Madras government to
continue to ignore the problems of industrial labor. Under pressure from
the Government of India, it appointed a Commissioner of Labor in 1920.
This proved little more than a gesture. The responsibilities of the Commissioner
were ill-defined, and in a crisis like the South Indian Railway strike
he held "strictly aloof" because his intervention had not been requested by
both parties to the dispute.

In 1920--21 the Madras government also experimented with conciliation
boards and courts of industrial enquiry: these were allowed to lapse with
the decline in labor unrest in 1922. The 1926 Trade Unions Act provided
for the registration of approved unions but not for conciliation machinery.
Three years later, the Trade Disputes Act authorized the setting up of _ad hoc_
conciliation boards and courts of enquiry, but these remained virtually
inoperative provisions until the Congress ministry of 1937--39. Then V. V.
Giri, the Minister for Industries and Labor, and a former railroad union
leader, tried to breathe life into the moribund legislation. This was no easy
task. The legislation was cumbersome and phrased in language few
workers could understand. Encouraged by Giri's promises of a new deal for
labor, workers impatiently pressed demands which had been in abeyance
during the Depression years. Their optimism soon turned to disappointment
and bitter frustration when they found how slow and remote the
formal process of arbitration and conciliation was. They were shocked and
angered by the readiness of the Congress ministry to resort to police
repression to quell labor militancy.

[^/28]: For example the strike at the Choolai mills, Madras, April 1930: G.O.1366 (1-S), Public
Works and Labor (Confidential), 1 May 1930, T.N.A.

[^/29]: Morris, _Emergence of an Industrial Labor Force_, pp. 196--97.

[^/30]: G.O. 110, Judicial, 19 January 1898, T.N.A.

Even with a former union leader as Labor Minister, the Madras government
remained basically hostile to strikes and picketing. Under pressure
from London and New Delhi, it came to accept the legality of trade unions,
but saw them either as mutual benefit societies or as agencies through which
workers could be disciplined, their grievances aired, and management
decisions enforced. "Healthy" trade unionism was held to be apolitical,
eschewing outside leadership and party affiliation. Strikes might, it was
conceded, be a very last resort after negotiations had failed to reach an
agreement between unions and employers. Preferably, they were to be
avoided altogether, and in key industries were virtually outlawed. The
protest function, so prominent in Britain's own unions, was subordinated
to a control function that amounted to the cooption of union officials by
the management and the colonial state. This perverted unionism was not
confined to India: it was common to other British colonial territories.[^/31] It
was an interpretation of unionism that industrialists and managers readily
adopted for it promised them a compliant labor leadership and a weapon,
sanctioned by the state, for use against militant workers. In withdrawing
his recognition of the South Indian Railway Labor Union shortly after the
1928 strike, the Agent explained that it should not be construed from this
that he was opposed to unions as such. "I consider unions properly
organised and wisely directed and counselled are most useful labor institutions
...,"[^/32] he said; and he proceeded to patronize and extend his formal
recognition to a rival, moderate, union. But labor leaders who conformed
to management--government expectations of their roles were likely to forfeit
workers' support, or to find, once again, a divergence between their
tactics and those of the workers they purported to represent.

Although by the 1940s government attitudes had shifted from outright
hostility to unions to qualified approval of them, from _laissez-faire_ to
state-sponsored conciliation and arbitration, in one fundamental respect
the nature of government involvement remained unaltered. Despite professions
of neutrality between capital and labor, the government repeatedly
used state power to support the employers and to thwart effective strike
action.

[^/31]: William H. Friedland, _Vuta Kamba: The Development of Trade Unions in Tanganyika_
(Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1969), especially chapter 1,

[^/32]: _Hindu_, 2 August 1928. For a detailed discussion of government and management
attitudes to unions during the Congress ministry, see David Arnold, "Labour Relations in a
South Indian Sugar Factory, 1937--39," _Social Scientist_ (Trivandrum), 65 (December 1977),
16--33.

The government's handling of the South Indian Railway strike was
characteristic. It refused to mediate in the dispute though the labor leaders
and the press urged it to do so. Instead it relied for its understanding of the
crisis on police reports (a most unsympathetic source) and information
provided by the Agent. As the executive head of a state-controlled enterprise,
the Agent enjoyed extremely close relations with the government,
and there is some indication that he allowed the dispute to come to a
show-down secure in the knowledge that the state would support him
against the strikers once it became a "law and order" issue. Even before the
strike began, the government took precautionary steps that favored the
Agent. Two developments were anticipated. One was rioting and violence
at the workshops, and to pre-empt this several hundred armed police were
sent to Nagappattinam and Tiruchirapalli. The other was a strike affecting
the main-line junctions and stations. To counter this the South Indian
Railway police, numbering nearly 700 officers and men, were posted at
strategic points.

Despite these preparations, the initial scale and effectiveness of the strike
took the authorities by surprise. Harrassed district magistrates and police
superintendents scurried from one place on the line to another, trying to
persuade the thousands of men, women and children obstructing the lines
to allow trains through. Sometimes, with patience and good humor, they
succeeded. But it was not long before the Agent and the government
regained the initiative. Good humor vanished and attitudes on both sides
hardened. A company of paramilitary police was ordered to Tiruchirapalli
on July 21; detachments of armed police escorted every train; and village
watchmen guarded the tracks at night to deter saboteurs. The government
also considered calling out troops. The Criminal Procedure Code was
invoked to prohibit meetings by strike leaders or those in sympathy with
the strike, first in Madras, and subsequently in ten other centers. The arrest
of strike leaders began on July 23, and in all more than 300 railmen were
arrested.

There were several clashes between police and strikers, resulting in the
death of one striker and injury to many others. The government approved
police "firmness" and censured officials who failed to "assert authority."
An Indian magistrate and police superintendent who tried, without resort
to force, to persuade a large crowd to leave the tracks near Villupuram on
July 21, were said by the Inspector-General of Police to have allowed
matters to reach "a dangerous pitch" --- though it was the later firing of a
revolver by a European police officer which provoked serious crowd violence.
The Inspector-General added that "the endeavor to argue an unreasoning
mob into a state of sanity, combined with an unwillingness to adopt
forceful measures, proved merely provocative." He contrasted this with
Madurai, where "an exhibition of organized force rendered abortive the
designs of the strike leaders" at an early stage.[^/33]

After the strike's defeat, the government claimed that the police and
magistracy had taken "no action beyond that dictated by their responsibilities
for the preservation of the public peace." The labor leaders thought
otherwise. In calling off the strike on July 30, they protested that "In an
economic fight between capital and labor, police repression should find no
place, but we find to our dismay that they act more as creatures of capital
than as the custodians of public peace, law and order."[^/34] Having set out to
take on the management, the unionists found themselves embroiled in an
unequal contest with the colonial state.

The workers were not, it should be noted, hostile to the state as such. The
1928 strike was one of the many instances when industrial workers sought,
in vain, for sympathetic government investigation into their grievances.
But their attitude to the police was one of total enmity. In town and
countryside alike, the subordinate police were immensely unpopular for
their bribe-taking, their use of torture and intimidation, and their identification
with landlords and industrialists. The arrival of the police during an
industrial dispute, as much as during a village brawl, revived long and bitter
memories of petty police tyranny and quickly made them the target for
crowd hostility. In an industrial dispute, strikers resented that, by calling in
the police, the management avoided dealing with them directly and that
blacklegs protected by the police might defeat their strike and steal their
jobs. The arrival of the police was, therefore, likely to start an escalation of
violence. Police retaliated against stone-throwing strikers with bayonet- or
_lathi_-charges, or they opened fire without allowing the crowd time to cool
its anger or disperse. Death or injury to a few strikers would often provoke
greater indignation and violence until, finally, further shooting broke up
the crowd and the police regained control.[^/35]

The disproportionate scale of police retaliation reflected the readiness of
the colonial authorities to use force to resolve conflict situations or simply
to overawe and intimidate strikers. It was also expressive of their racist
contempt for a colonized people. No British government, at least since the
early nineteenth century, would have condoned such repeated and undiscriminating
use of firearms against unarmed strikers in Britain. But in India
life was held cheap --- the life, that is, of the colonized. It is, therefore,
appropriate at this stage to examine more closely race as a factor in
industrial violence.

[^/33]: G.O. 733, Public, 31 August 1928; G.O. 974, Public (Conf.), 1 November 1928; G.O. 171,
Judicial (Conf.), 1 April 1929, T.N.A.

[^/34]: G.O. 733, Public, 31 August 1928, T.N.A.; _Hindu_, 30 July 1928.

[^/35]: For example, _Report of the Non-Official Enquiry Committee regarding the Shooting of
Millhands at the Cawnpore Cotton Mills Company_ (Kanpur: Mercantile Press, 1924), pp. 8--12.
For an example of violence against police escorting blacklegs, see the account of disturbances
during the strike at the Buckingham and Carnatic Mills, Madras, in December 1920, in G.O.
779, Public, 14 December 1920, T.N.A.

# III

Racial conflict was inherent in the colonial system of industrial labor
management. Its origins lay further back, in the Europeans' racial arrogance
and physical maltreatment of Indian servants and employees. As
early as August 1789 the _Calcutta Gazette_ had cause to deplore "the custom
of flogging \[Indian\] servants," more than a century later, Sir Henry Cotton
recorded that the "pernicious practice of striking natives, and especially
domestic servants," still prevailed in the second half of the nineteenth
century as "a common and general habit ... ;" and in 1896 Ram Gopal
Sanyal listed 134 cases of racial violence (mainly by European planters,
soldiers and overseers) which were sufficiently notorious to have reached
the courts or the English press but which, almost invariably, met with
inadequate punishment or official investigation. [^/36] It is not surprising that
an attitude of racial contempt so widespread among the European community,
so ineffectively punished by the courts, should infect industrial
relations from the outset.

European managers and supervisors were generally absent from industries
financed by Indian capital and run by Indian management, such as the
cotton mills of Bombay, Ahmedabad and Coimbatore; but even Tata's
iron and steel works at Jamshedpur employed Europeans as technicians
and supervisors. The jute mills of Bengal, the cotton mills of Madras and
Madurai, the indigo works of eastern India, the tea and coffee plantations
of Assam and the south, the railroads throughout India --- all employed
substantial numbers of Europeans. In 1911, the railroads of the Madras
Presidency employed 2,817 Europeans and Eurasians out of a total work
force of 52,257; 142 of the 148 railroad officials were Europeans or Eurasians,
as were 961 of the 1,264 subordinates earning Rs. 75 or more a
month. In 1921, 157 of the 276 foremen in mechanical and engineering
workshops (including those of the railroads) were Europeans and Eurasians.[^/37]
It was not until the 1920s, with mounting political pressure for
Indianization, that many European companies and state-managed enterprises
(like the railroads) reluctantly began to promote Indians to senior
positions.

[^/36]: Selections from the _Calcutta Gazette_ (Calcutta: Government of India, 1865), II, p. 223;
Sir Henry Cotton, _Indian and Home Memories_ (London: Fisher Unwin, 1911), p. 65; Ram
Gopal Sanyal, _The Record of Criminal Cases between Europeans and Natives for the last
Hundred Years_ (Calcutta: Sanyal, 1896).

[^/37]: _Census of India: Madras, 1911_ (Madras: Government Press, 1912), XII, part 1; _Census of
India: Madras, 1921_, XIII, part 2, pp. 215--16.

Recruited directly from Britain, or from the British Army, regarding
Britain as the home to which they would return on retirement, residing and
seeking their recreation in a racially-exclusive housing colony and club, the
white supervisory staff and management showed great reluctance to understand
the culture of their Indian subordinates or to learn more than a few
abusive phrases of the vernacular. Even domiciled Europeans and Eurasians
shared these attitudes: indeed, they may have been the more important
to them in establishing their identity with the dominant white community.
At the height of labor unrest at the Buckingham and Carnatic
textile mills in Madras in 1921, the European management isolated two
administrative problems which it felt underlay the current industrial conflict.
One was that European standards of "strict discipline and cleanliness
... were not in accordance with the tastes of the work people" and thus
generated friction between mill-hands and supervisors. The other was that
the management "found it impossible to get their British superintendents
of different departments to learn the vernaculars, Tamil and Telugu . ..."[^/38]
It is, perhaps, an indication of the broader division between European staff
and Indian workers that many of the demands put forward in strikes in the
1920s had a cultural basis rather than an economic one --- leave to celebrate
Hindu festivals, for example, or permission for Muslims to hold Friday
prayers.[^/39]

Across this linguistic and cultural divide, it was more than usually
difficult in early industrial capitalism for workers to communicate their
grievances and receive a tolerant response. Even in the Indian-managed
mills of Bombay, linguistic differences between the English- and Gujarati-speaking
management and the Marathi-speaking mill-hands presented a
problem of communication unparalleled in the experience of textile mills in
Britain and New England.[^/40] The divide was the more acute in European-managed
factories in India where it was accentuated by the racial contempt
in which the Europeans and Eurasians generally held Indian workers. It
was not uncommon before 1920 for white supervisors and managers to
resort to petty violence to express their annoyance with Indian workers
who ignored or failed to understand their directions. But even a European
supervisor whose kicks and punches led to the death of an Indian laborer
was likely to escape before the courts with a light fine.[^/41] When workers
downed tools or hurled missiles in protest, Europeans (especially before
about 1920) were likely to reach for their revolvers to threaten them unless
they returned to work. Following shooting by European staff at the Budge
Budge Jute Mill on the outskirts of Calcutta in 1895, the Bengal government
issued a statement "strongly deprecat\[ing\] the practice of employing
firearms to put down demonstrations on the part of the employees of the
mills." It averred that "the occasions on which recourse to such weapons is
really necessary are of the rarest possible occurrence, and that there are few
crowds of native workmen who would not yield to firm and reasonably
conciliatory action on the part of the European managers and assistants."[^/42]

[^/38]: "Notes on Situation in Madras," Home Political, 93/1/1921, National Archives of India,
New Delhi.

[^/39]: See the evidence from Bengal in _RCL_, V, part 1, pp. 122--23.

[^/40]: Morris D. Morris, "The Recruitment of an Indian Labor Force in India, with British and
American Comparisons," _Comparative Studies in Society and History_, 2:3 (April 1960), pp.
324--25.

Nonetheless, such incidents persisted, and not only in Bengal. Although
the riot, referred to earlier, at the Perambur rail workshops in 1913 arose
from workers' opposition to new clocking-in procedures, racial hostility
greatly contributed to the violence that followed. The workers began by
throwing missiles at the European and Eurasian foremen and managerial
staff, who retaliated by opening fire on the workmen, killing two and
injuring three others. One Indian who was so incensed as to expose his
private parts and dare a European to shoot at them found himself in
hospital shortly after with bullet wounds in his shoulder. Although the
shooting took place before the police could arrive and without magisterial
authority, the action of the European staff was approved by the local
magistrate (and subsequently by the government) on the grounds that
"nothing short of wounding and perhaps of killing was sufficient to quell
the rioters and that had the riot not been stopped when it was, very grave
consequences to life and property would have ensued." The Indian press
protested that "very grave consequences" had already ensued for the
Indians involved and that it was illegal for Europeans to take the law into
their own hands in this fashion.[^/43] In 1918--21 there were a number of
instances of European violence against Indian workers in the Buckingham
and Carnatic Mills and of Indian reprisals. On 20 October 1920 weavers sat
in the doorway of the European Weaving Master's office and refused to let
him out (a form of protest, known as _gherao_, common in India today).
"When, after waiting for a long time, he attempted to get out the weavers
assaulted him and threw spindles at him, and when he took out a revolver
he had in his pocket they rushed at him, snatched the revolver from his
hands and assaulted him. ... "[^/44] An upsurge of hatred against European
and Eurasian supervisors and managers sometimes spread beyond the
factory compound. In July 1921 workers at the Buckingham and Carnatic
Mills threatened to invade the residential quarters of the European mill
staff, and in February 1942 they dragged Eurasians from buses passing the
factory gates.[^/45] As these illustrations suggest, racial antipathy was a source
of violence by workers and supervisors alike.

[^/41]: For such a case, see Bengal Judicial, nos. 12--16, 14 April 1885, India Office Library,
London.

[^/42]: Cited in Karnik, _Strikes in India_, p. 14.

[^/43]: G.O. 1303, Judicial, 5 June 1914; G.O.s 195--6, Judicial, 27 January 1914, T.N.A.

[^/44]: _RCL_, VII, part 1, p. 40.

Racial violence was not confined to the worker--manager or worker--supervisor
relationship. It extended deep into the work force in industries
where there were large numbers of European and Eurasian subordinates.
The railroads were the primary example of this. While most of the higher
appointments and technical posts went to Europeans selected in Britain,
many of the permanent-way inspectors, workshop technicians, train-drivers
and guards were appointed locally from ex-soldiers of the British
Army, from Europeans born and brought up in India, and from Eurasians.
A writer in the _Calcutta Review_ in 1859 observed that many of the Europeans
employed on the railroads as subordinates were "rough, uneducated
men. ... The ill-feeling that has arisen between the natives and European
workmen on the railways is generally caused by inability to understand one
another ..."[^/46] Lowly in the sight of the white elite, these European and
Eurasian subordinates enjoyed (and jealously preserved) a privileged position
as a racially defined aristocracy of labor. Their wages were double or
treble those of Indians who held similar jobs on the railroads; they received
special leave concessions and were allocated superior residential accommodation.
Racial discrimination permeated every aspect of life and work on
the railroads, and the Europeans and Eurasians had their own railway
institutes (recreation centers) and special schools for their children, some
locally, many in the hills. Indians were denied these, or offered inferior
substitutes. Demands for equal opportunity and privileges became as
central to Indian railmen's petitions and strike objectives by the late 1920s
as they were to be for their African counterparts a generation later.[^/47]

The European and Eurasian subordinates had grievances of their own
against the management. Dating from about 1877, the Eurasian and
Anglo--Indian Association (later the Anglo--Indian and Domiciled European
Association) acted as a spokesman for rail workers opposing Indianization
and the influx of superior European staff from outside India. At the
close of World War I inflation and the prevailing mood of industrial unrest
impelled a number of European and Eurasian subordinates to agitate for
higher wages. But within a very short time they identified themselves with
the management in opposition to the Indians' strikes and unions. One
reason for this was that the management responded more promptly to their
demands for extra allowances and bonuses than to those of the far more
numerous Indian railmen --- thus deepening the latter's sense of grievance
and discrimination.[^/48] But the advent of popular nationalist agitation
played a part. In one of several such cases in the 1920s, Indian railmen in
the United Provinces struck work in February 1922 in protest against the
alleged assault on an Indian fireman by a Eurasian engine-driver.[^/49] Such
incidents were not new, but popular nationalism and unionization made
Indians more resentful of their inferior and abused position, and the
nationalist press was quick to publicize racial grievances. By 1930 European
and Eurasian subordinates were so alarmed by progressive Indianization
and so alienated from the Indian labor movement as to have begun
forming their own unions.[^/50]

[^/45]: G.O. 671, Public, 7 Oct 1921; G.O. 1130, Pubic (Conf.), 8 April 1942, T.N.A.

[^/46]: "English Life in Bengal," _Calcutta Review_, XXXIII (December 1859), p. 325.

[^/47]: See the evidence presented by rail unions in _RCL_, VIII, part 1; cf. R. D. Grillo, _Race,
Class and Militancy: An African Trade Union, 1939--1965_ (New York: Chandler Publishing
Co., 1974), chapter 4.

The South Indian Railway was not immune from these developments,
but in the hope of ensuring effective strike action in 1928 the labor leaders
appealed to Eurasian subordinates to ally themselves with other workers in
opposition to the Agent. At first, if only from fear of intimidation, the
Eurasians stayed away. Then, as the Agent and the government introduced
strong police protection for train crews, the Eurasians came down decisively
on the side of the management and enabled it to maintain a skeleton
service. This infuriated the strikers, who not only saw them as strikebreakers,
but were also confirmed in their basic hostility to the Eurasians as
a privileged group, loyal to the management and not to the workers as a
whole. Stones were thrown at engines, Eurasian train-drivers and firemen
were forced out of their cabins, jostled, insulted, and threatened with
knives. The riot which followed the collision at Comerford level-crossing
on July 25 of a light engine and a bus owed much of its spontaneity and
ferocity to the fact that the engine-driver and firemen were Eurasians.[^/51]

There was one further dimension to racial conflict between Indian and
European or Eurasian railmen. While Indians outside the police and army
were generally denied access to firearms, almost all European and Eurasian
railroad employees were enrolled in militia or territorial army units known
as the Volunteers and, after World War I, as the Auxiliary Force (India).
These units were used to quell disturbances when police forces were inadequate
or troops unavailable. Sometimes in the 1920s, such as in 1926 and
again in 1928 on the South Indian Railway, they were mobilized for use
against Indian strikers. To be faced by fellow-railmen, captained by senior
railroad officials, uniformed and armed, cannot have endeared the European
and Eurasian subordinates to their Indian colleagues.

[^/48]: G.O. 660, Public (Conf.), 9 October 1920, T.N.A.

[^/49]: L/P&J/6/902 of 1922, India Office Library. See also Karnik, _Strikes in India_, pp. 71, 78,
135, 205.

[^/50]: _RCL_, VIII, part 1, pp. 602--29; part 2, pp. 332--38.

[^/51]: _Hindu_, 25 June, 30 June, 19 July, 22 July, 25 July, 26 July 1928; G.O. 789, Public (Conf.),
15 September 1928, T.N.A.

# CONCLUSION

Detailed and quantitative comparisons would be difficult to compile, but
rural labor in India was probably no more or less disposed to violence than
in other peasant societies. Gandhian non-violence and the peaceful withdrawal
of labor had their rural antecedents, but there existed, too, a
powerful tradition of collective violent protest and resistance, especially
among the rural poor. As in other countries in which industrialization was
taking place, Indian workers, immigrant from the countryside, brought
with them their "reactive" forms of protest, and, as in the case of food riots,
might continue to share them with the rural population. Neither the
character of capitalist relations between Indian workers and their
employers, nor the condition in which workers lived and labored, differed
greatly from elsewhere. But what accentuated conflict and sustained a high
level of violence in Indian industry (and, it may be conjectured, in that of
similar societies) was its peculiar colonial and racial context. First, large-scale
unionization (beginning at the close of World War I), then, in 1926,
the legal recognition of trade unions, and, finally, in the late 1930s, the
establishment of conciliation and arbitration machinery by the state ---
these stages outwardly gave increasing security to the Indian labor movement.
But they thinly disguised the continuing hostility of the colonial state
to assertive unionism and especially to strikes and picketing. Government
and management insistence on a form of unionism that provided little
scope for effective industrial action, coupled with police intervention and
repression, prevented workers from finding satisfactory expression for
their grievances and demands through institutional channels. By default,
they clung to their violent traditions. In addition, the racial division
between Indian workers and European managers and supervisors exacerbated
the class conflict inherent in early industrial capitalism. The readiness
with which Europeans used force against Indian workers, and the state's
failure or disinclination to prevent them, made racial aggression and
retaliation a primary source of industrial conflict. This pattern of racial
violence was replicated at a lower level in industries, like the railroads,
employing large numbers of European and Eurasian subordinates.

It might be said against this contention that colonialism and racism were
basic causes of the high level of industrial violence in India, that the end of
British rule and the departure of Europeans from Indian industry has not
led to any great diminution of violence. For that there must be several
explanations, but one may be noted here. Independence did not bring
about a fundamental change in the character of industrial relations. The
Indian state apparatus, especially the police, and the Indian and international
managers of the post-independence period, have perpetuated and
elaborated, indeed have made their own, attitudes towards labor that
formerly characterized colonial India.
