
# Preface

I could not help writing this book; I was getting deeply
concerned about the rising tide of the rage of a considerable
section of communal Hindus against Muslims. This has taken
the worst form in Gujarat. It has been a fallout of sectarian
politics which is both a hangover of the British rule and the
consequence of Partition. Earlier it was a menace but now it
threatens to be a weapon of extermination of a minority. Its
earlier outburst was more among Muslims than Hindus; it
brought about, to start with, a kind of alienation of the
Muslims from the Hindus. Later, by the forties of the last
century, this developed into a rage of Muslims against the
Hindus. The communalism of Hindus was then not as virulent.
Gandhi was able to contain it; it surfaced now and then but
remained by and large ineffective. However after Partition this
gained strength and succeeded in widening the divide between
the two communities. I have dealt with the alienation in my
book: The Widening Divide, published by Penguin India. I have
analysed the causes of the distrust between Hindus and
Muslims. In this book I have relied heavily on my earlier
research for the relevant material.

My personal experience has also influenced my thinking;
all through my public life, extending over sixty years, I have
worked hard to fight Muslim communalism and to better
Hindu--Muslim relations. At the instance of my mentor, Y.B.
Chavan, I formed the Indian Unity Centre to further the cause.
I devoted considerable time to it and worked for it in many
ways taking advantage of the various positions I was privileged
to hold. The All-India Khilafat Committee, with its hoary
past, of which I have been chairman for over 20 years, has
now become a vehicle of communal harmony. I have struggled
to establish this and all the other organizations I run, as centres
of national integration. But with every decade, I notice the
barriers between the two communities becoming more and
more impregnable and of late it has been increasingly difficult
to penetrate these.

Communalism both in its Hindu and Muslim garb is really
a product of the British rule; the new rulers, with their colonial
outlook, sowed the seed slowly and gradually. The two
communities drifted apart; this, in turn, proved beneficial to
the rulers in administering the country; they implemented, in
their characteristically subtle way, the time-tested policy of
"divide and rule". The ugly outcome of it was the recurrence
of riots which prevented the building of "the union of hearts",
to quote Gandhiji's words, between the two communities.

As time passed, the British introduced the game of power
politics by doling out to Indians a measure of administrative
responsibilities; this added to the rivalry between the leaders
of the two communities, each wanting more of it. The British
played the role of an empire and managed to put one against
the other. Then came the Mahatma who upset their
applecart. His revolt changed the situation; but the animosity
between the Hindus and the Muslims continued. This was
however confined to the table; there was no breaking of
heads in the streets.

In fact until 1937 Muslim politics was in the doldrums;
Jinnah gave it an aggressive form after he discarded his
nationalist past and mobilized the Muslims to fight the Hindus.
He used every device, including the Two-Nation theory, to
keep the two apart. He frustrated every move towards
fraternization and in the last stage, even called upon the
Muslims to fight it out in the streets but his move for the socalled
"Direct Action" in 1946 turned out to be a fiasco. The
constitutionalist in Jinnah had lost his balance. He asked for
blood which resulted in the death of five thousand Hindus
and Muslims; but it failed to achieve its purpose as in the
holocaust, which Jinnah had ordered, more Muslims were
killed than Hindus, as disclosed by Sardar Patel who was then
the Central Home Minister. In retaliation the Hindus in Bihar
massacred ten times more Muslims. For the first time the Hindus
showed that they were not cowards. They could be more brutal
than the Muslims.

Jinnah gave to Muslim communalism the name of
nationalism; it was based on religion. Hindus had opposed
such a concept during the freedom struggle under the leadership
of Gandhi; but after Partition the communal Hindus heartily
adopted it. Their communalism has since become as much
religion-based as Muslim communalism. Before 1947, the rage
had gripped the communal Muslims in the name of Islamic
nationalism; now the communal Hindus have taken to it and
use it against the Muslims in the name of Hindu nationalism;
its worst exhibition has been the gruesome massacre of the
innocent and hapless Muslims in Gujarat.

There is a difference, however, in the rage of the Muslims
which Jinnah had generated by his call of "Direct Action" in
Calcutta and the rage of communal Hindus as let loose by
them in Gujarat. In Calcutta there was a Hindu--Muslim riot;
in Ahmedabad, Vadodara and other places there was a onesided
slaughter of the Muslims. Jinnah had at first thought
that in a hand-to-hand fight with knives and sticks Muslims
would have the better of the Hindus; after the Calcutta
massacre, he found that his calculation was wrong; in a civil
war, which he often threatened, the Hindus would be able to
beat the Muslims. He therefore gave up threatening civil war
and put all his eggs in the British basket; without their support
he would not realize his dream of Pakistan. He worked hard to
win over the British to his side; Churchill gave him full support.
Mountbatten came to his rescue but he could give him only a
truncated homeland; he told Jinnah that was the best the
British could do for him. Nehru and Patel committed the
greatest blunder in agreeing to Partition, much against the
wishes of the Mahatma; the aftermath was so horrendous that
the two leaders later publicly regretted their decision.

After obtaining Pakistan, Jinnah was most distressed about
the loss of Kashmir which acceded to India; he sent tribals to
take the valley but they were thrown out. After his death his
successors tried to get it through the United Nations but
having failed, they waged two wars against India in which
they were badly trounced. So Pakistan has now decided on
the obnoxious method of sending suicide squads in the form
of the so-called _jihadis_, to annex Kashmir. These _jihadis_ kill
innocent persons and in the process often get themselves killed
too. They are indoctrinated by their mentors with the belief
that by dying they would be martyrs which would assure them
a place in heaven. They bring bombs and blow up not only
men but also women and children. They exploit the name of
Islam to commit these heinous crimes; they kill mostly Hindus;
this fuels the Hindus' hatred against Indian Muslims.

Partition broke my heart; I had opposed Jinnah's TwoNation
theory and told Muslims that by following it they would
be ruined. They did not heed it; the miseries that they are
undergoing in South Asia today is of their own making. The
Hindus remained steadfast and refused to turn India into a
Hindu rashtra. They adopted secularism as their state policy
which although a western innovation, has its roots in the
teachings of the Upanishads, the Buddha and Asoka. After
Independence Nehru pursued it with vigour; but the hatred
that Partition had instilled in the hearts of Hindus against
Muslims worked against its proper implementation. They felt
it benefited more the Muslims than the Hindus. They
characterized it as pseudo-secularism which appeased the
Muslims. As for the leaders of the Muslims, they raised nonissues,
fomenting religious controversies which had little to
do with the welfare of their co-religionists; these unfortunately
brought them into conflict with the Hindus and added to the
ill-will between the two communities. It also angered the
communal Hindus who felt that even freedom had not given
them the hegemony to which they were entitled. They felt
that the Muslims who remained in India had become an
obstacle in the way of India's progress and a threat to the
cultural dominance of Hinduism.

Nirad Chaudhuri has rightly observed:

>After 1947 there
has been a tendency to consolidate communities along religious
lines; both Hindus and Muslims did not find anything wrong
in their efforts towards religious consolidation. Religious
rigidities were over-stressed by the respective elite of the two
communities even cutting across the pressures of development
of science and technology in the country. The elite on both
sides have made use of religion for securing political and
economic ends.

In the result Muslim communalists gained
nothing, while the Hindu communalists became aggressively
hostile to the Muslims. The tables were turned.

Coming to what happened in Godhra, no one can excuse
the torching of the Hindus in the ill-fated Sabarmati Express;
it appears to have been the work of some illiterate Muslim
goons who had nothing to do with Islam. But for their crime,
innocent Muslims in different parts of Gujarat were massacred;
this shows how religion in India, to use the words of the noted
sociologist, Conor O'Brien "combines combustibility with
nationalism to fuel political murder". Strangely the barbarism
which took such a beastly form was committed by Gandhi's
own people; they turned their face against all that he had
taught them. The brute in them was roused and surprisingly
it was religion which brought it to the fore.

The more I think about it the more I am distressed; I have
done enough to expose Muslim communalism; I thought the
time has now come to explore the nature of Hindu
communalism, especially the violent form that it has lately
assumed. I am still unable to understand why Gujarat erupted
in the manner it did. Is it just an aberration or a warning about
the shape of things to come? Are the rest of the Hindus likely
to take to the same path, believing that it will ensure a more
prosperous future for them?

I have tried to be objective in my assessment of what I call
the rage of an influential section of communal Hindus. I have
avoided any reference to politics and politicians as well as to
persons and organizations who occupy the centre stage in the
communal arena. In the first four chapters which pertain to
the current events I have refrained from giving my own reaction
and appraisal to what happened in Godhra and thereafter in
the rest of Gujarat. I have given the reports and views of some
of the most distinguished writers and intellectuals, mostly
Hindus, and that too in their own words; none of them is a
protagonist of one school or the other. I have quoted them at
length even at the cost of being accused of indulging in a cutand-paste
presentation; they have put their arguments so
cogently and candidly that I felt I could not have done better;
I thought readers deserve the best material available.

In the subsequent chapters I have discussed both the
grievances of Hindus against Muslims and the religious
misrepresentations and historical distortions pertaining to Islam
and the Muslims which have been used as cannon fodder by
communal Hindus in their tirade against Muslims. I have
also delineated the essential features of the lives of three
magnificent apostles of communal harmony who have been
wrongly presented by the votaries of Hindu communalism as
the promoters of Hindu revivalism. In the last chapter I have
dealt with what Muslims should do to better their relations
with Hindus. However what has intrigued some of the best
minds is why have Hindu--Muslim relations worsened to this
extent? I am firmly of the opinion that Partition is the main
cause. And so long as it remains intact I feel there is little hope
of any substantial improvement. In fact the old historical
baggage is resurrected because of Partition and the communal
virus that was spread by the propagation of Jinnah's TwoNation
theory has been revived once again and given a
more aggressive form.

It is Muslims who asked for Partition and the irony of it is
that it is they who became its worst sufferers. It has not only
done the greatest damage to India's security but has shattered
all the traditional ties which had bound Muslims of the
subcontinent together. Politically they have indeed lost heavily
but even culturally their loss has been colossal. Families have
been separated; their contact with one another has been
dismally disrupted; their language, Urdu, has been more or
less destroyed; the community on the whole has been
uprooted. Above all, their security has been endangered. Their
weakened position has strengthened the anti-Muslim
communal forces among the Hindus who now have a
convenient handle to harass and harm them. Had it not been
for the secular temper of a large number of Hindus and the
broad humanism which is the kernel of Hinduism, the
extermination of Indian Muslims would have been easily
carried out. Though there was a genocide of Muslims in
Gujarat, it must be admitted that the rest of India
reacted unequivocally against it. And that is what has saved
the Muslims.

However if the _jihadis_ continue with their suicidal
operations and Pakistan refuses to give up its anti-Hindu
stance then as General Musharraf himself told the Pakistanis,
the fate of Indian Muslims will be jeopardized. Those who
believe that the rest of the Muslim world will be bothered
about them are grossly mistaken; each of the fifty Muslim
countries is so mired in its own problems that it has
no time for others. Pan-Islamism was a myth; it has never
worked in practice.

_The Milli Gazette_ has rightly observed:

>Indian Muslims,
who have been in the forefront of supporting pan-Islamic
causes for a century, will have to take stock of their situation.
They need to rethink their priorities and devise ways to save
them while leading their lives as principled and law-abiding
citizens. Gujarat should be a watershed for the community
and the country. Enough should be enough.

Indian Muslims
must be realistic and carve out their own future in such a way
that they can live in peace and harmony with the Hindus.
There are still enough Hindus who would be only too willing
to give them a helping hand. Muslims must grasp it. My book
is an attempt to take Hindu--Muslim relations in that direction.

I hope my sincere and humble effort to remove the cobwebs,
which have bedevilled Hindu--Muslim relations, will help bring
back the India of Tagore's dream which he has so beautifully
expressed in his poem:

>Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high;
>
>Where knowledge is free;
>
>Where the world has not been broken up into fragments
>
>By narrow domestic walls;
>
>Where words come out from the depth of truth;
>
>Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards perfection;
>
>Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way
>
>Into the dreary desert sand of dead habit;
>
>Where the mind is led forward by Thee
>
>Into ever-widening thought and action;
>
>Into that heaven of freedom,
>
>My Father, let my country awake.

All I can say is that this book is the outcome of the deep
anguish which I as an Indian Muslim have gone through; it is
not written in the spirit of denouncing the communal Hindus
but to convince them that their rage against Muslims is
misplaced. It is also to impress upon Muslims that they must
introspect and reorient their attitude towards the Hindus with
a view to rebuild the bridges between the two communities.

Some of my Hindu friends, whose opinion I value, have
objected to my over-emphasis on the rage of the communal
Hindus which they say has gripped only a fraction of the
community. Others, however, have warned me that the
communal virus has infected a much larger cross-section of
Hindus, in particular the middle class who now openly speak
and work against Muslims; they feel they have had enough of
the Muslims who have nothing in common with them and
are more obsessed with their religion than their country. These
Hindus regret that Partition has remained incomplete. They
feel it should have included the transfer of the entire
population. I sincerely hope the large majority of Hindus
does not subscribe to this view. The day that happens, chaos
will overtake India.

A horrifying suggestion was made by a bigoted Hindu
leader to M.J. Akbar, editor-in-chief of _The Asian Age_. He said:
"the best solution to the Muslim problem in the subcontinent
is to line up every Indian Muslim on the border with Pakistan,
and then start a war: the Indian Army could finish Pakistan
while Pakistan would finish India's Muslims." Akbar took it as
a joke; but that showed the depth of hatred some Hindus bear
in their hearts against Muslims.

In his farewell address, K.R. Narayanan, the outgoing
President of India, made a special appeal to Hindus who are
the majority community to

>speak out in the traditional spirit
of the Hindu religion. My parting appeal to you is to guard
our tradition of tolerance, for, that is the soul of our culture
and civilization, that is the spirit of our Constitution, and that
is also the secret of the successful working of our democracy
and the secret of the coherence of this vast country as a united
nation.

He drew the nation's attention to what Jawaharlal
Nehru had told the chief ministers soon after Partition:

>We
have a Muslim minority who are so large in numbers that they
cannot, even if they want to, go anywhere else. They have
got to live in India. That is a basic fact about which there can
be no argument. Whatever the provocation from Pakistan and
whatever the indignities and horrors inflicted on non-Muslims
there, we have got to deal with this minority in a civilized
manner. We must give them security and the rights of citizens
in a democratic state. If we fail to do so, we shall have a festering
sore which will eventually poison the whole body politic and
probably destroy it.

Prof. Amartya Sen of Cambridge University is one of the
most outstanding thinkers of our times. He has distinguished
himself as an economist with a difference. As Dr. Bhalchandra
Mungekar, Vice-Chancellor of Mumbai University said in his
citation, while the degree of doctor of laws was being conferred
on Prof. Sen by the Mumbai University, that the eminent
professor rose above the normal views, strands, and ideologies
and gave a new turn to economics. He showed how it could
be used as a successful tool "to secure enhancement of the
quality of human life". In this Prof. Sen's contribution has been
unique and he is admired the world over for presenting a new
path for achieving the welfare of the poor and the oppressed.
In 1998 he was honoured with the Nobel Prize in Economics,
mainly due to his contributions to development and welfare
economics, with special emphasis on poverty elevation. My
wife Fatma and I spoke to him in Cambridge and sent him the
manuscript of the book. He liked my approach to the problem
of Hindu--Muslim relations and the analysis of the recent
gruesome happenings in our country. He is worried about the
fear that these have generated in the minority. His Foreword
expresses his deep anguish and sincere concern about the future
of our secular polity. I am deeply indebted to him for the
Foreword and for his kind words about me.

Fatma has mastered the art of editorship. She managed with
distinction her editorial assignments first in The Illustrated
Weekly of India and later in _The Times of India_ for over two
decades. She now edits The Taj Magazine. All my books have
been scrutinized by her penetrating eye; each has benefited
enormously as she reconstructed my thoughts and polished
my presentation. This book has had the same advantage;
I am indeed fortunate in having her as a companion who
is a tower of perfection.

I am grateful to Harsha Bhatkal, my publisher, for the
interest he took in my book and to his associate Uma Prabhu,
an experienced and able journalist, for her constant
involvement in the various aspects of the publication as also
her enterprising colleague Swapna Shinde. I wish to thank
my personal assistant M.V. Raghavan for typing and retyping
my manuscript over and over again and for designing the book
and the cover along with the graphic artist of The Taj Magazine
Sanjay Patil. I also thank my secretary Durraiya (Netra)
Khokhar for proof reading the manuscript painstakingly.
Shabbir Muchhala took a personal interest in overseeing the
work of printing the book at his first-rate press, in record time.
I am thankful to him.

\ 

Mumbai, August 15, 2002.

\ 

Rafiq Zakaria
