_This article examines a flourishing group of elite litigators, that we call 'Grand
Advocates', who practice before the Indian Supreme Court and some of India's High
Courts. In a court system marked by overwhelmed judges with little assistance,
multiplicity and blurriness of precedent, and by the centrality of oral presentation, the
skills and reputational capital of these lawyers enables them to play a central, lucrative,
and unique role. Indeed, it is often the Grand Advocates, as much as the judges, who
lead and propel forward the Indian judicial system. We argue that our exploration of
Grand Advocates provides a counter-example and an analytical framework to
understand why the homogenizing forces of globalization may not necessarily lead to a
convergence in the structure of the legal professions in different countries._

\ 

# Introduction

An observer of the legal scene in contemporary India quickly becomes aware of
the presence of a stratum of legal superstars --- advocates based at the Supreme Court and
some of the High Courts who are very much in demand and widely known. These 'Grand
Advocates,' as we call them, are the most visible and renowned legal professionals in
present day India. Stories abound of their strategic acumen, their preternatural
articulateness (speaking for hours and days without notes), their esoteric quirks and
outsized incomes, and their contributions to the 'rule of law.' This elite handful of
lawyers is involved in almost every high-profile case in what is one of the most active
and powerful higher judiciaries in the world (Rajamani & Sengupta: 2010; Robinson: 2009).
Their clients include India's new uber-rich, major multinational corporations, and
the country's political class.

We argue that Grand Advocates (GAs) have not only survived, but flourished in
the age of globalization --- benefiting from, while resisting absorption by --- the rising law
firm sector. A series of structural features of litigation and the judiciary in India have
played a dominating role in perpetuating this unique set of lawyers, and the culture
they inhabit. Litigation in India tends to be less about money (as there are fewer deep
pockets, judges rarely grant large monetary compensation, and it is difficult to collect an
award), and more about control. Given the backlogged courts, cases may drag on for
years and so it is necessary to secure beneficial interim orders as they relate to the
ownership of property, command over an organization, or the validity of government
regulation. To achieve these ends, Grand Advocates use the extensive human capital
they have developed within the court system and their nuanced knowledge of both
formal and informal judicial procedure. These assets are in many ways positional
goods --- particularly their reputational capital before certain judges --- that are difficult to
share with juniors or partners. They are also assets that can be used in a wide range of
cases, thus lessening the pressure to specialize amongst this select group of lawyers,
who are still largely generalists.

We know of no close parallels to Grand Advocates amongst lawyers in other
countries, at least outside South Asia.Unlike the venerated French or Brazilian jurists,
who flourish in a system where judicial precedent is less decisive, the GAs are not based
in or linked to academic institutions, nor do they produce books or concepts (Sweet:
1992: 30--35). They are not "authorities" whose intellectual products are considered
authoritative like the eminent British barristers who furnish "opinion of counsel"
memoranda (Niles: 1963: 86). Like the increasingly exclusive US Supreme Court bar
whose lawyers' name recognition increases the chance their clients' cases are granted
_certiorari_, Grand Advocates in India are known for securing hearings for their clients
(Sundquist: 2010). However, the US Supreme Court bar handles far fewer cases than the
Grand Advocates and does not wield the same dominating influence in their
relationship with judges.

The Grand Advocate's relative uniqueness when compared to their potential
peers elsewhere is worth noting as one of the central debates in comparative law is the
degree to which legal systems around the world are converging. For example, scholars
have examined whether and to what extent constitutions are converging (Tushnet:
2009; Posner & Dixon: 2010), or whether convergence is occurring between civil law
and common law traditions (Merryman: 1987; Mattei & Pes: 2009). Meanwhile, few
systematic comparative studies of the legal profession have been undertaken (Dias _et al._: 1981; Abel & Lewis: 1988; Burrage: 2006; Dezalay and Garth: 2010; Halliday and
Karpik: 2011) and much less attention has been paid to the question of whether the
structure of the legal profession is converging. If globalization is creating increasingly
similar laws, regulations, and adjudicatory proceedings one might expect the legal
profession to also become more alike across countries as lawyers adapt to increasingly
analogous contexts.

Answering this larger question about whether the structure of the legal
profession is converging across countries is beyond the scope of this chapter. Instead,
we provide a counter-example to the convergence thesis and, by detailing how Grand
Advocates shape and are shaped by distinct features of the legal system in which they
operate, show how unique forms of legal practice may be perpetuated even in the face
of potentially homogenizing forces.

We begin our study, which is based on interviews with more than fifty legal
professionals in Delhi, Mumbai, and Madras, by analyzing the structure of the legal
system and the Indian bar in which Grand Advocates flourish.[^/4] We then turn to examine
the type of work Grand Advocates do, the arc of their careers, and the impact they have
on the legal system. Although the structure of this section of the bar has witnessed
notable continuity, we conclude by finding that a new set of demands from clients,
judges, and other lawyers may in the future fundamentally alter the space Grand
Advocates currently occupy. This will likely not erase the distinctiveness of the Grand
Advocates, but will certainly shape their evolution.

# Background

Pre-British India had learned specialists in law, but nothing that corresponded to
the legal professions of the modern world, which are made up of qualified practitioners
who earn a living by representing clients before courts and tribunals and designing
transactions that are affected by legal rules (Rocher 1968--69; Calkins 1968--69). Today's
Indian legal profession is a product of the complex of British-style legal institutions
imposed on India in the 18th and 19th centuries (Setalvad 1960), but lawyers in India
developed along different lines than their counterparts in Britain or elsewhere in the
common law world.[^/5]

The professional pattern as it crystallized in the late 19th century was a
composite, drawing upon two main streams: (1) the royal courts in the Presidency
towns (Bombay, Madras, and Calcutta), which were ruled by the British crown and
English law administered by British judges and there was a dual profession, with
barristers briefed by solicitors. (2) Until 1857 most of India (i.e., the _mofussil_ or
interior) was ruled by the East India Company, which operated courts staffed by civil
servants and which licensed indigenous _vakils_ (a Persian word that earlier referred
generally to an agent or emissary) to represent clients in those courts. The two systems
of courts were merged when the British government displaced the East India Company
after the 1857 rebellion (Derrrett: 1963).


[^/4]: Interviewees are kept anonymous in this article. Many of the interviewees would themselves be
considered Grand Advocates. We also interviewed younger litigators, advocates-on-record, law firm
partners, general counsel, and other legal professionals with knowledge of these advocates.

[^/5]: The reference to India here is inclusive of all of British India. To a considerable extent our observations
about Indian lawyers apply to Pakistan and Bangladesh, whose legal institutions also derive from those of
colonial India.


Recruitment to the profession was through multiple sources: British barristers
arrived from the UK to enjoy the higher fees that could be earned in India; elite Indians
went to the Inns of Court in London to secure qualification; others acquired on-the-job
training at the Indian courts; and (after the establishment of Universities in India
starting in 1857) these were joined by those who had attended law courses in India
(Galanter: 1968--69; Gandhi: 1988).

There was not a single hierarchy of courts in British India. Instead, there was a
hierarchy within each province, culminating in a High Court (or in a few cases, a Court
of the Judicial Commissioner). Appeal from these courts lay to the Privy Council in
London and was expensive and rare. In 1935, under the Government of India Act, a
federal court was established with a narrow jurisdiction over all of British India
(Gadbois 1963: 19). After Independence in 1947, the Constitution (1950) brought
unification into a single hierarchical system of courts, headed by a Supreme Court with
an expansive jurisdiction and wide powers of judicial review.

With the passage of the Advocates Act (1961) all the old grades of practitioners
(_vakils_, barristers, pleaders of several grades, and _mukhtars_) were abolished and
consolidated into a single body of advocates who enjoy the right to practice in courts
throughout India. The only _formal_ distinctions that remain within this body of
advocates are:

(1) Lawyers can be designated as _senior advocates_ by the Supreme Court or any
of the 21 High Courts. This is an elite stratum along the lines of the British Queen's
Counsel (QCs). But the Indian distinction is far more selective: QCs make up almost 10%
of British barristers, while _senior advocates_ are less than 1% of Indian lawyers
(The Bar Council: 2013). _Senior advocates_ enjoy priority of audience; they cannot
appear without a separate "briefing" advocate (or, in the Supreme Court, an _Advocate
on Record_). Seniors are foreclosed from doing pleadings, drafting, and conveyances (Bar
Council of India Rules 2009, part 6, ch. 1). We estimate that there are about a thousand
_senior advocates_, including some four hundred designated by the Supreme Court
(Supreme Court of India). A _senior advocate_ designated by one court is recognized as a
senior in other courts as well. _Senior advocates_ may be attached to firms, not as
partners or employees, but on retainers or fee arrangements. Few of the most
prominent are so attached.[^/6]
(2) The requirement that an advocate on the _Original Side_ of the Bombay and
Calcutta High Courts be briefed by a solicitor was abolished in 1976, but it is still
possible to qualify as a solicitor. This requires an extended apprenticeship as an articled
clerk and passing an examination. Of those who seek this qualification only a small
portion (5 or 10%) pass the examination. For example, in 2010 in Bombay only 11 of
the 171 candidates (and none of the 30 first-time takers) passed (Ganz: 2010). Some
elite advocates in Bombay still insist on being briefed by a solicitor (Int32), but this is a
mandate of custom rather than law.
(3) The Supreme Court early on enacted rules requiring that all matters at the
Supreme Court be filed by an Advocate on Record (AOR). AORs can argue matters, but
frequently they serve in a solicitor-like role, briefing advocates. In all cases they
perform the various formalities of registration and scheduling of the case. One becomes
an AOR by passing an examination administered by the Supreme Court.[^/7] In 2011 there
were some 1872 AORs. Estimates of the number actively engaged in practice range from
400--500 to 1000 (Shrivastava: 2012).


[^/6]: There is no specific prohibition of a partnership between a firm and a senior counsel, except many senior
counsel argue that if a firm they were part of met with a client it would be perceived as them meeting with
a client thus violating provisions under the Advocates Act barring seniors from meeting directly with
clients.


The number of persons admitted to practice law in India has increased from
about 70,000 at time of Independence in 1947 to some 1.2 million today. No one knows
how many of these are actually engaged in the practice of law. Our guess is that at least
one-third and possibly one-half are _not_ practicing law.

+------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| Year | Number of Practitioners Enrolled with the State Bar Councils |
+======+=============================================================:+
| 1952 | 72,425                                                       |
+------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1985 | 290,676                                                      |
+------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| 1999 | 626,603                                                      |
+------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
| 2011 | 1,273,289                                                    |
+------+--------------------------------------------------------------+
:Table 1 - The Lawyer Population

_Source_: Report of the All-India Bar Committee (1953), Institute of Developing
Economies: 2001: 72; Ganz (2013)

Less than 1% of these advocates are admitted to practice at the Supreme Court.
As of 2013 the Supreme Court Bar Association lists 6806 active resident members, 908
active non-resident members, and 2701 temporary members.[^/8] The fraction of these with
a substantial practice at the Supreme Court is not known.

# The "Basic Structure" of the Indian Legal Profession

Most of the old categories and grades of practitioners have been abolished, but
new forms of diversity amongst lawyers have emerged. Lawyers may be found in firms,
as in-house counsel (Wilkins: 2012), and in legal process outsourcing (Weiss: 2008). All
of these have proliferated in the last twenty years, but the great bulk of India's lawyers
remain attached to the dominant model of professional life --- the free-standing advocate
who practices mainly, if not exclusively, at a single court. This model, formed in colonial
times, was firmly institutionalized by the early 20th century. In spite of the vast political
and social change India has undergone, if we were to go around India in 2013 and
observe lawyers, we would find a set of distinctive and characteristic features of
professional life that are surprisingly similar to what we would have found in 1913.


[^/7]: An AOR must practice as an advocate for four years, train with a senior AOR for one year, then appear
for an examination conducted by the Supreme Court. An AOR must maintain a registered office within 16
kilometers of the Supreme Court building. Supreme Court of India Rules, Order IV (2010).

[^/8]: Supreme Court Bar Association Members Directory, _available at_ [http://scbaindia.org/Web/aspx/directory.aspx](http://scbaindia.org/Web/aspx/directory.aspx).

We might think of these features as the 'basic structure' of the Indian legal
profession. A schematic portrait of the modal organization of legal services in India,
then or now, would include:

* Individualism: lawyers practice by themselves, usually assisted by clerks, and
sometimes by juniors in a casual and temporary apprenticeship arrangement.
There are few firms or other enduring units for coordination and sharing
among lawyers. Firms are proliferating but still involve only a tiny fraction of
practicing lawyers --- perhaps 2 or 3% --- and the larger firms are rarely
focused on litigation.
* Lawyers are oriented to courts (and other court-like forums) to the virtual
exclusion of other legal settings. The orientation to courts is displayed
spatially: lawyers spend much of their working day at a particular court. They
typically see clients in home offices or in chambers near or attached to the
court, or simply at the _verandah_ or a corridor of the court. The identification
of the lawyer with a particular court goes back to the earliest days of British
rule (Sahay: 1931: 24, 26, 33).
* The performance of the lawyer is overwhelmingly oral rather than written.
With occasional exceptions, advocates focus on courtroom advocacy rather
than advising, negotiating or planning. That is, they are _de facto_ barristers
who operate in a setting in which the 'solicitor' functions of advising are far
less developed. Judges frequently cite oral argument in their judgments and
advocates feel little constraint in making arguments that were only partially
developed in the written submissions, or that were not mentioned at all. The
dominance of the barrister model is displayed in, and reinforced by, the
structure of remuneration. Lawyers are typically paid by the "appearance" ---
that is, for court work in a particular case on a given day. (Moog: 1992: 26)
* Lawyers are relatively unspecialized. Although some advocates have a special
expertise in tax or criminal matters, few lawyers limit themselves to one area
of law.

One significant consequence of the thick and continuous interaction of lawyers
at the court premises is that the lawyers at each court form a guild with a capacity for
collective action. This was displayed dramatically in the resolute and persistent actions
of the Pakistani lawyers --- who occupy a social world similar to that of their Indian
counterparts --- who struck and demonstrated when judges of the Pakistan Supreme
Court were removed by President Musharraf in November 2007 (Ghias: 2010). The
Indian examples of lawyers' strikes and boycotts are generally less inspiring. The first
such assertion of lawyer muscle at the Supreme Court took place in 1982, when the
Supreme Court Bar Association staged a strike in response to a judicial memorandum
that suggested eliminating oral argument in certain categories of cases (Dhavan: 1986:
55--56). The strike action was called off when the judges reassured the lawyers that the
suggested changes, which would have undercut a major source of income for lawyers,
were merely proposals (_Hindustan Times_: 1982). In 2012, the district court in Delhi was
brought to a halt by lawyers protesting a rule that placed a monetary limit on cases that
could be heard by the district courts (IBNLive: 2012). In the same year lawyers in
Karnataka boycotted courts across the state after a police attack on lawyers at the civil
courts complex in Bangalore, where lawyers had attacked journalists covering a
politically important trial, claiming that the journalists had portrayed them poorly in
connection with earlier encounters (Daily News and Analysis: 2012).

While Grand Advocates frequently hold bar offices, they are remote from
involvement in such direct action. They typically disapprove of exercises of lawyers'
street power although as we will see the bar's militant opposition to reform helps to
preserve many features of the setting in which the Grand Advocates flourish.

# Steep Hierarchy

The pre-eminence of the Grand Advocates is a contemporary expression of a
long-standing and pervasive pattern of steep hierarchy at the bar. At every level, the
provision of legal services was (and is) dominated by a small number of lawyers with
outsized reputations, who have the lion's share of clients, income, prestige, standing and
influence.

The pre-eminence of the Grand Advocates is a contemporary expression of a
long-standing and pervasive pattern of steep hierarchy at the bar. At every level, the
provision of legal services was (and is) dominated by a small number of lawyers with
outsized reputations, who have the lion's share of clients, income, prestige, standing and
influence.

This pattern has been noted by a number of observers of the Indian legal scene
over the last half-century. For example, in his late 1960s study of a district bar of about
a hundred lawyers in Haryana, Charles Morrison (1968--69: 261) identified "five or six"
who are "recognized as 'leading lawyers." In his (late 1970s) study of a district court in
the Punjab, J.S. Gandhi (1982: 79) reports that the 12 "specialist" lawyers (in a bar of
over two hundred) "handled among themselves at least fifty % or more of the total
practice." Robert Moog (1997: 73--74)in his mid-1980s account of the Varanasi bar
describes how, of the over 3000 advocates in Varanasi, "\[a\]pproximately two dozen
_senior advocates_ ... dominate the civil practice. ... It is not unusual for members of this
elite group to have as many as twenty-five matters scheduled in court on one day." In
his 1991 study of lawyers in a Haryana District, Hans Nagpaul (1994: 59) found that
10% of the 300 lawyers enjoyed some 75% of the legal business.

Upon the establishment of the Supreme Court of India in Delhi in 1950, lawyers
were drawn to the new court from cities where there were existing High Courts. At first
these lawyers commuted to Delhi to argue their cases. Later many shifted to the capital ---
as prominent lawyers at the High Courts have continued to do. Before long, the
Supreme Court had its own steep hierarchy of practitioners headed by an entourage of
'leading lawyers', much along the lines familiar in High Courts and district courts
throughout the country.

We estimate that the number of pre-eminent seniors --- those we are calling
Grand Advocates --- at the Supreme Court today is something on the order of 40 to 50. If
we add those of comparable status at the High Courts, there are at most a hundred that
make up what one observer refers to as the "giants and legends of the litigation
system."[^/9] This shape --- very steep hierarchy, with a concentration of prestige, authority,
and prosperity in a narrow group of senior lawyers --- has been a constant feature of law
practice in India in colonial times and after Independence, in the highest courts and in
local courts, when the bar was flourishing and when it went through difficult times.

Back in 1983 T.K. Oommen (1983), a leading sociologist, provided a shrewd
assessment of the profound consequences of the steep and pervasive professional
hierarchy in the Indian bar. The concentration of business in a few hands, he observed,
underlies a culture of postponement in the judiciary. Judges give postponements to
eminent lawyers, who are constantly juggling more courtroom obligations than they can
possibly attend, meaning that cases are dealt with in disconnected bits over a long
period of time. As one young lawyer observed --- this was almost thirty years later ---
"There is a cartelization of litigation by the senior counsel. They take on more cases
than they can deal with. This leads to delays in the courts because the seniors don't
make it for appearances. ... As a result, the quality of litigation suffers overall and it gets
more expensive."[^/10]

Oommen (1983:24) concluded his study by remarking that "most importantly,
the leading lawyers rather than the judges, emerge as norm-setters and value-givers in
the Court system. Interpreted meanings provided by the lawyers in support of their
clients rather than interpretations by judges assume importance in the application of
law." Oommen made these observations about the dominant position of the top lawyers
compared to the judges in the 1980s, before liberalization. But this sense of the
dominance of the top lawyers is if anything more pronounced today. One leading lawyer
observed: "The judges are almost irrelevant. We all know some man has to do it. It's
good if they are good, but \[it is\] not expected. The counsel have learned to treat them
with kid gloves. To guide them. I think the judges have a deep rooted inferiority
complex."[^/11] As this suggests, at least some Grand Advocates perceive themselves as
positioned further up in the hierarchy than most judges. This sense of superiority may
be reinforced by the social backgrounds of many of the Grand Advocates and judges.
While Grand Advocates are almost always from a cosmopolitan background and well
versed in English, judges come from a variety of settings, with many raised in non-English
speaking households in more provincial settings.

We might think of the dominance of the lawyers as an instance of regulatory
capture (Bernstein: 1977), in which the agenda and decisions of an agency (the courts
in this instance), established to regulate an industry (here, litigation) in the light of
external standards, instead reflects the perspective of the industry it is supposed to
regulate (especially in relation to courtroom management). This is especially likely
where, as here, the agency decision makers are recruited from among the regulated.

But the capture metaphor may lead us to overlook a more fundamental point.
Thomas Reed Powell (1880--1955), a Harvard law professor, is credited with the
observation that "If you think you can think about a thing that is inextricably attached to
something else without thinking of the thing which it is attached to, then you have a
legal mind." (Simpleman: 1986: 545) In this spirit we can appreciate the artificiality of
thinking about the institution of the Grand Advocates without thinking of the judicial
setting in which they flourish. Indeed, we might imagine the Grand Advocates and
India's higher courts as the inextricably attached parts of the same creature. In a setting
where oral presentation overshadows written submission and where the judges have
insufficient time and resources for independent research, the GAs enjoy the esteem of
the judges, who give them more "face time" to argue and who rely on their accounts of
the law and the facts. The GAs play an oversized role and their presence thus helps to
maintain the acephelous system in which similar legal questions are decided in slightly
different ways by multiple small benches of judges of the Supreme Court and High
Courts.


[^/9]: Email from Nikhil Chandra, 12 Apr. 2012.

[^/10]: Interview 18.

[^/11]: Interview 23.

As far back as 1977, Rajeev Dhavan (1977: 415) observed the phenomenon of
"different judges deciding the same point of law as part of differently constituted
Benches \[of the Supreme Court\] reach\[ing\] different results." Since then, departure from
uniformity has been aggravated by the multiplication of judges and benches and the
reduction in the number of larger benches (Robinson: 2013a: 173). When the Supreme
Court was established in 1950 there were just eight judges. In the 1950's they sat on
five-judge or larger benches for 13% of published decisions, and otherwise regularly sat
on three judge benches. By the first decade of the 2000's the designated strength of the
Court had grown to 26 justices, increasing to 31 in 2008. Some 40,000 admission
matters are now heard on admission days (nowadays Monday and Friday) by over a
dozen division benches that typically consist of just two judges each. Similarly, the
5,500 or so regular hearing cases (heard on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday) are
decided by these smaller division benches. (Robinson: 2013b; Robinson: 2011: 28).

The presence of so many benches, and the resulting pervasive (though mild)
indeterminacy of precedent, increases the chances that representation by a GA may
make a difference in outcome. At least it is perceived to possibly make a difference by
significant numbers of clients with deep pockets engaged in controversies where the
stakes make irrelevant the size of legal fees. The standing of GAs with the judges is a
positional good in limited supply (Hirsch: 1976) --- there can only be so many top
lawyers familiar to the judges and so lawyers with reputations of being top lawyers
have enhanced value to many clients. We might think of litigation in India as a kind of
fabulous beast guided by modest and quickly-replaced judicial forelegs and driven by
powerful Grand Advocate hind legs. The outcomes are, as Dhavan observed, "technically
unpredictable" (Dhavan: 1977: 461) and invite investment in high end advocacy to
further destabilize the results.

# The Seniority Factor

Seniority is a major theme that surfaces at many points in our scan of the
profession. Seniority works differently for judges than for lawyers. On the bench,
adherence to seniority in promotion (senior judges of the High Courts are generally
elevated to the Supreme Court) is combined with a rigid and early retirement age, 65 on
the Supreme Court, 62 on the High Courts, and 60 in the lower courts. Seniority makes
retirement and promotion predictable and means that most judges will not serve on the
Supreme Court for more than five years (Chandrachud: 2012).[^/12]


[^/12]: Although it is a matter of custom rather than law, the power of the seniority norm was enhanced by the
"supercession" of three more senior Supreme Court Judges in 1973. A succinct account is found in Lee 2010.
During the Emergency (1975--77), Indira Gandhi superseded Justice HR Khanna who was next in line
to become Chief Justice after he dissented in _ADM Jabalpur v. Shukla_ A.I.R.1976 S.C. 1207 which held
that because of the Emergency citizens did not have a right to petition the courts for their _habeas corpus_
rights. When he was not made Chief Justice, Khanna resigned in protest. With the end of the Emergency,
Indira Gandhi and many of her policies, including her political manipulation of the judiciary fell into
disrepute. Since then the government had adhered faithfully to the seniority norm.

Some distinguished advocates decline to ascend to the bench, many because of
the money, but others because compulsory early retirement diminishes the attraction.
One GA told us that he turned down a judicial appointment because he could predict
that he would eventually be Chief Justice of India for but one year (Int32). For those on
the bench seniority is a wasting asset that affords standing, influence and a privileged
lifestyle but then suddenly disappears. The forcibly-retired judge is then dependent on
political figures who can bestow appointments to commissions, tribunals, etc. or on
private parties --- including at times Grand Advocates --- who can then engage the former
judge for lucrative arbitration assignments. It is difficult for retired judges to serve,
even as volunteers, with their former courts, for it is not clear how they are to be placed
on the all-important seniority ladder.

For the GAs, on the other hand, seniority brings with it not only enhanced
standing, but an enlarged fund of human capital in the form of contacts, experience and
reputation. Often Supreme Court judges are not only younger than the _senior advocates_
who argue before them, but the judges may have looked up to these advocates when
they themselves were young lawyers. The judge almost undoubtedly has had his post
for less time than the GA has been practicing in the Court meaning that the GA may feel
more at home in the institution than the judge.

By tradition, _senior advocates_ enjoy a right of pre-audience according to
seniority, defined by the date they became senior --- that is, they are entitled to be heard
before those junior to them. If two advocates are briefed on a matter and they must
meet for a conference tradition dictates the junior lawyer should go to the senior
lawyer's office. Punctiliousness about seniority may limit collaboration. In a famous
instance, in Mrs. Gandhi's 1975 election case, "she wanted \[famed advocate Nani\]
Palkhiwala to come to Allahabad to represent her" but Satish Chand Khare, her senior
counsel objected. "He said that Palkhiwala was junior to him and he would withdraw
from the case if Palkhiwala was brought in. Since Khare had been involved from the
very beginning and was familiar with all the facts, Mrs. Gandhi did not want to run the
risk of his withdrawing and dropped the idea of bringing Palkhiwala to Allahabad."
(Bhushan: 2008: 131) After she lost at the High Court in Allahabad, Palkhiwala did
represent her on appeal to the Supreme Court.

# Grand Advocates' Clients

Jawaharlal Nehru's father, Motilal Nehru, became one of the wealthiest men in
Allahabad litigating the disputes of the _zamindars_ (wealthy aristocratic landowners).[^/13]
After independence, the _zamindars_ disappeared with land reform, but other clients, like
industrialists and banks, multiplied. Compensation remained high for top advocates, but
given the sluggish pace of national growth and the government's large hand in the
economy, fee increases remained tempered. In fact, law was seen as one of the least
attractive career choices for promising young students, who instead flocked to more
desirable professions like medicine, engineering, or the civil service.[^/14] However, this
changed as liberalization opened up abundant new revenue streams for lawyers --- multi-national
corporations began to eye India as a prime global site for investment, India
minted thousands of new millionaires and billionaires, and law firms rose to prominence
to cater to the businesses that were helping drive the country to the 7 to 9% growth rates
it witnessed in the first decade of the 2000s.


[^/13]: Advocates in India have long been paid at high rates. Indeed, part of the appeal for British barristers to
come from England to India was the higher rate of compensation. Schmitthener 1968--69: 346.

As a result, today's top counsels' fees are exceptionally high. As of 2012, leading
advocates not infrequently charged 500,000--600,000 Rupees per appearance ($10,000--12,000)
at the Supreme Court. In the Supreme Court's hallways, Grand Advocates can
be seen moving briskly from court room to court room with a flock of juniors, clerks,
and clients in tow as they proceed from argument to argument. This is a business plan
in action. On an admission day at the Supreme Court, sometimes referred to amongst
top lawyers as "harvest days", an advocate is often able to appear in as many as five to
eight arguments. Many of these arguments may last just a few minutes, allowing the
advocate to reap substantial monetary rewards in the course of just a few hours. On
regular hearing days, advocates usually have far fewer matters, which they argue at
greater length and more substantively, although counter-intuitively they charge about
the same for these matters as for the shorter admission hearings. To prepare for
admission and regular hearing arguments lawyers hold conferences with their clients
for which they charge an hourly fee. Otherwise, all preparation costs are incorporated
into the appearance fee. It should be emphasized that the earnings of these advocates
do not derive from their ownership interest in a business (i.e., a law firm) with salaried
workers, but are payment for services rendered by them personally. Unlike the partners
in law firms they do not collect payments for leasing their reputational capital to
subordinates who can then command enhanced fees (Galanter & Palay: 1991). Instead,
they pay their juniors, clerks, and other staff out of their own pockets for the marginal
contribution of the latter to the bundle of services delivered to clients by the _senior
advocate_.

Top advocates in India enjoy incomes that rival the most highly remunerated
lawyers anywhere in the world.[^/15] Abhishek Manu Singhvi, who along with being a top
litigator is also a member of the Rajya Sabha, reported his annual income at 50 crore
(about $10 million) in 2010--2011. Ram Jethmalani, another leading lawyer who is a
member of the Rajya Sabha, reported his at 8.4 crore ($1.7 million) (Dhawan 2011).
Shanti Bhushan, a leading advocate who was on a public committee to design a new anti-corruption
agency, disclosed an annual income of 18 crore ($3.6 million) (Hindu 2011).
Both Jethmalani and Bhushan are well over 80 and no longer litigate as much as they
once did. One advocate estimated that top Supreme Court lawyers are generally earning
between 10 and 50 crore a year (i.e. $2--10 million annually) (Int25). Leading lawyers that
appear before the Bombay and Delhi High Courts have comparable fees, while those
elsewhere in the country usually charge considerably less.


[^/14]: As Schmitthener noted in the late 1960s "The legal profession no longer offers the most honored and
profitable work that can be attained in India. It no longer draws the best students, and it no longer
dominates the social and political life of the country. The monopoly it had on the leadership of the country
for over a century is now gone. In a way the rest of society has caught up with the profession."
Schmitthener 1968--69: 47.

[^/15]: _See_ Sahgal and Bamzai 2010; Bar & Bench News Network 2010.

Despite their high rates, client demand for these select lawyers is robust. Most of
the leading advocates we interviewed conceded that their fees were exorbitant, but
justified continuously raising fees as a mechanism to keep their workload manageable.
As one Supreme Court lawyer explained, "Lawyers like me charge the sky. It is a way of
filtering clients." (Int14)

Risk aversion often brings cases to senior counsel, especially those with big
names. As one lawyer who worked at a distinguished law firm stated, "The head of legal
at a large corporation wants to ward off blame. They first hire a large firm like
Amarchand so they can say 'Amarchand told me.' The firm doesn't want the
responsibility so they then hire a grand advocate so they can say they had the best.
Everyone just keeps passing on risk." (Int24) On a similar note, explaining why 10% of
the lawyers got 90% of the work, a top Supreme Court lawyer noted, "When the stakes
are high you get the best surgeon. It's the same in law."[^/16]

Under the Advocates Act, senior counsel are not permitted to have their own
clients. Instead, they must be approached by a briefing counsel who is retained by the
client and who actually files the case. Briefing counsel are often solo practitioners who
argue smaller matters themselves, but for larger cases enlist a senior counsel. Other times
briefing counsel are attached to law firms. Senior counsel are traditionally not attached
to law firms, and some senior counsel interpret the law as barring them from being a part
of a law firm.[^/17] One prominent lawyer at the Indian Supreme Court estimated that about
70% of his work came through individual advocates, while about 30% came from law
firms (Int10). Most large law firms in India do not have extensive litigation practices,
perhaps in part because they anticipate senior counsel would take up too much of the
firm's profit margins.

Clients who have had positive experiences with certain seniors commonly
request their briefing counsel to hire those seniors. At the Supreme Court, clients from
particular regions of the country often seek out top advocates from their region. Other
times, clients request a top advocate who is from the same region as the judge hearing
the case or is otherwise perceived to have a particularly good rapport with the judge.
Some leading advocates seem to cultivate relationships directly with clients, although
under the Advocates Act and Bar Council Rules (Part VI, Ch. 1) they cannot deal with
clients directly. As one top Bombay lawyer suggested, "If a senior has a good client --- say
Reliance \[a major Indian Corporation\] --- they aren't going to let them go away, so they
will keep a junior as an AOR for that client." (Int21) In-house counsel frequently demand
that their briefing counsel ensure certain _senior advocates_ argue their cases, and more
generally work with these _senior advocates_ on their matter. As a leading lawyer noted,
"The growth of in-house counsel has been positive. Often the associate of the law firm is
clueless and you get your real briefing from the general counsel." (Int10)

Firms and briefing counsel often have a strong role in guiding clients towards
their favorite seniors. As a partner in a leading solicitor firm in Bombay explained:

"There are 7 to 8 top arguing counsel in Bombay that I would trust a brief with. At the
Supreme Court, to be honest, it is only 5 to 6. In the Delhi High Court it is larger. I
judge a good counsel on (1) competence level (2) how much time we can get with the
senior (3) their face value, particularly for \[admission matters\] in the Supreme Court
where at most you will have 10--15 minutes in front of the judge." (Int20) One well
known High Court lawyer estimated 75% of his work came from 20--25 law firms and
briefing counsel, who kept returning to him for work. He described how "Each senior
counsel has favorite briefing firms. Particular law firms use 'x' or 'y' as senior counsel."
(Int8)


[^/16]: Interview 9; In the US context, Frank and Cook have commented that top lawyers receive salaries far
higher than their social value would justify because everyone wants the "best" lawyer, particularly for high
stakes litigation. Frank and Cook, 16 (1995).

[^/17]: There is no specific prohibition of a partnership between a firm and a senior counsel, except many senior
counsel argue that if a firm they were part of met with a client it would be perceived as them meeting with
a client thus violating provisions under the Advocates Act barring seniors from meeting directly with
clients.

Top senior counsel are notoriously inaccessible and this is one of the largest
complaints from briefing counsel and clients. As a lawyer at a solicitor's firm in Bombay
lamented, "Half my job is chasing senior counsel." (Int19) Some firms are known to
designate young lawyers to follow seniors while they argue matters in court so that the
firm can keep track of where the senior is and remind him to attend their client's hearing.

Indeed, seniors will frequently miss hearings because they are arguing another
case in a different courtroom. This results in part from the unpredictability of a
chronically backlogged and poorly managed judicial system. In this context, judges will
often allow advocates (or their juniors) to reschedule matters, requesting a "passover" if
the senior is either not available or inadequately prepared. As a top senior in Bombay
explained, "It's fair when clients complain that we aren't there for hearings, but I think
we make reasonable estimates about what matters the judges will and will not
reach."(Int21) Another argued, "When I have 5--6 matters on a day I think only one or
two will go forward meaningfully. The system allows this. There is no penalty from the
court or client if I miss a hearing. There isn't good scheduling so there is the possibility
to have a lot of flexibility." (Int23) Other seniors countered that their colleagues booked
too many matters, and even charged for hearings that they actually missed. A handful of
leading advocates have a reputation for taking fewer cases, despite the loss in income,
because they feel taking too many matters would be unfair to the interests of their clients.

Since at least the 1980's, litigants with deep pockets have used "blocking" or
"negative retainers" to disqualify the major top advocates from being engaged by
opponents (Int10). Back in 1986 a distinguished academic reported that "Resourceful
clients, especially big corporations and universities make it a practice to offer a retainer
to expert lawyers, not so much with a view that they will act in the case but with the view
that their services do not become available to the other side. ... Wholesale buying of legal
services in this way is now a standard strategy for corporate clients. ..." (Baxi 1986: 459)
These litigants identify the top lawyers in the court who would be ideal for their case and
then "block" them, usually by paying them for a conference to discuss the case. Since the
advocate has been retained by one party he can then not appear for the other side, limiting
the talent the opposition has to choose from. This practice is controversial and some
lawyers will back out if they feel they are being used for blocking, or will require that
they be given the first chance to argue. Others view it as an acceptable form of business
and will accept a negative retainer without even holding a conference or insisting that
they argue part of the matter. In a major case, it is not uncommon for a litigant to block,
or attempt to block, five or six lawyers.

For large matters, litigants frequently retain more than one senior, not only to
"block" the other side, but because there is no assurance that their counsel will actually
be available for the hearing, given lawyers' propensity to overbook and the
unpredictability of the Court's scheduling.[^/18] Some sought after lawyers are even
rumored to charge a double rate to guarantee their appearance. One Supreme Court
lawyer recalled a joke told about Ashok Sen (a very prominent Supreme Court advocate
and one-time Law Minister who practiced up until his death in 1996) that Sen required a
triple fee --- "one for the case, one for the promise to appear, and the third to keep the
promise." (Int27)

One of the largest sources of litigation work is the Government. Top Supreme
Court lawyers will often serve as an Additional Solicitor General, Solicitor General, or
Attorney General at some point in their careers, taking a sharp cut in their income to do
so. A handful of top lawyers are also closely related to political parties. For example,
Ram Jethmalani and Shanti Bhushan were law ministers, Abhishek Manu Singhvi is a
Rajya Sabha member, Arun Jaitley is the leader of the opposition in the Rajya Sabha,
Kapil Sibal is Minister of Communications and Technology, and P. Chidambaram is
Finance Minister.[^/19] Some leading advocates also engage in lobbying work, but most
official lobbying is done by law firms.

# Grand Advocates' Work

Advocates at the Supreme Court have strikingly wide-ranging practices. As one
quipped, "We are all generalists here." (Int12) GAs almost all have a portfolio that
includes a substantial amount of corporate work, but usually also some combination of
tax, constitutional law, intellectual property, government employment law, property, and
criminal law. Leading lawyers tend to be focused in the Supreme Court or one High
Court, but will travel to other cities to argue in another court for their client, charging a
much higher rate to do so. Work before tribunals --- such as the securities appellate tribunal,
the competition appellate tribunal, the national green tribunal, the income tax appellate
tribunal, the central administrative tribunal, and appellate tribunal for electricity --- has
made up a growing portion of these lawyers work as these forums have multiplied and
gained prominence post-liberalization. Some top advocates we interviewed also reported
that they now spend 5 to 15% of their time on arbitration. Indian Supreme Court and
High Court judges often serve on tribunals or as arbitrators post-retirement so it is not
surprising that litigants seek out Grand Advocates, who have established reputations
before these judges, to represent them.

Most of the Grand Advocates' work at court is dominated by more procedural
aspects of law. For example, one leading Supreme Court lawyer speculated that 70% of
his work came from admission day (Int10). Pleading for stays and interim relief accounts
for a substantial part of these advocates' work in court. During these shorter hearings, top
lawyers face-value is at a premium. One lawyer explained, "Face value matters in matters
like SLPs \[i.e. admission hearings\] at the Supreme Court where a decision is made in a
minute. A man that regularly appears will matter to that judge. That lawyer will know
what that judge considers worth hearing." (Int16) For the actual full hearing clients will
frequently enlist another, less expensive, lawyer who will go into the details of the case.
A top advocate's chief asset in many ways is the time and sustained attention he can
obtain for the client before a congested and otherwise impatient court.


[^/18]: Interview 12 ("Here you have to engage at least two seniors to make sure you'll have one. ... This is
because in the Supreme Court everyone keeps papers as you never know when the case will reach. It can be
about to reach for three months. The system accommodates you if you have a conflict.").

[^/19]: Note that Jaitley, Sibal and Chidambaram cannot currently practice before the Court because of their
political positions.

In Delhi and Madras lawyers typically operate out of offices in their homes or in
chambers near the High Court or Supreme Court. In Bombay, lawyers tend to have their
offices outside their homes. These offices, which usually have a conference room, an
extensive law library, and a large, wide desk at which the senior sits, bustle with juniors,
clerks, briefing counsel, and clients. Clients (and their briefing counsel) typically come
to the lawyer's office because as one top lawyer explained, one "shouldn't go to a client's
office"[^/20] as that indicated a degree of eagerness to please the client that denigrated the
profession.

A top advocate might have anywhere from 3 to 20 juniors. A junior may work on
one type of matter more than others, but explicit specialization is rare although not
unheard of. In Bombay, juniors are traditionally not paid, and instead use their senior's
chambers to become known amongst briefing counsel by giving noteworthy comments
during conferences with clients. They use the infrastructure of their senior's chamber for
their own work in their first years. In Delhi and Madras juniors generally do receive a
salary, although they also take on their own work. Some seniors pay their juniors just a
token salary while others pay the equivalent of salaries of junior associates at law firms.
Historically in Madras pay for juniors has been higher on average even though seniors
themselves are generally paid somewhat less there.

Briefing counsel drafts the initial brief, or at least set out the facts of the case.
The senior then examines the draft, revising it with the help of juniors and the briefing
counsel. In general the brief is given limited attention by the senior since the argument in
court often deviates from it: instead he generally focuses on preparing his own notes for
oral argument.

As already noted multiple senior lawyers will often be hired by a client to argue
a case together. They may coordinate strategy in advance on the telephone. However,
this coordination is frequently minimal and sometimes non-existent. As one Supreme
Court lawyer explained, "I find there is a bizarre situation where sometimes you don't
even know which lawyers are on your side. ... The solicitor often won't tell the senior
who is on their side. Maybe it's because they feel the lawyer won't study as much if they
know another big gun is coming." (Int12)

Many seniors and other lawyers we interviewed commented on the lack of
professionalism in litigation, which they felt meant that the quality of the work often
suffered. As one rising lawyer surmised, "The expectations for work here are different
\[than in the West\]. There doesn't need to be a high level of refinement. When you reach
85% you are good to go. The judges aren't great lawyers. The opposition lawyer will not
be well prepared. It's not worth putting in the extra 15%, which takes 50% of the time.
It's not that the lawyers couldn't perform, but there is no incentive."(Int23)


[^/20]: Interview 9. Compare the observation of Theron Strong (1914: 378) who traced the transformation of the
legal profession in early 20th century New York. Relations with clients, he reports, had "undergone a
complete and marvelous change. . ... The lawyer no longer receives the obsequious client hat in hand, but is
subject to the beck and nod of the great financial magnate, who, whenever he desires to see his lawyer
'sends for him.' It would never do for the lawyer who values his practice to insist that his client should call
upon him, instead of he calling upon the client.".

# Entry and Ascent

Young lawyers often complain about how difficult it is for them to break into the
elite world of litigation. Some of these barriers to entry are obvious. For example, the
Grand Advocates operate in an English speaking world, where fluency is a necessity and
British diction lauded. Only a minority of lawyers in India grew up in English-speaking
households. Others struggled to gain the necessary command over language to become
a Grand Advocate. However, language is not the only filter restricting entry into this
high-end world.

Family connections, or being part of certain social stratum, have clear benefits
for a young litigator. As one leading Bombay advocate recounted, "My father was a
lawyer so (A) you get familiar with terms; and (B) socially you meet successful lawyers
and judges. It demystifies everything. Many of the big names were my dad's close
friends. The _original side_ of the Bombay High Court is like one big family. Everyone
knows everyone professionally and socially. Being part of that makes it easier." (Int17)
With a family member in the profession, clients and briefing advocates become aware of
you more quickly and one can use the office space and library of one's family member.
All of this helps in the early years of litigation when paying briefs are rare and income
negligible. Indeed, being able to make it through the early bare bones years as a litigator
is perhaps the most formidable screening mechanism for the profession, favoring the
survival of those who come with wealth and connections.

Being part of the same social milieu also helps in arranging to junior with a
leading senior. Most of today's prominent seniors had themselves juniored for a
prominent senior, and older seniors we interviewed spoke proudly of their "alumni"
who had gone on to become successful lawyers themselves. There is a feeling that if you
don't have an actual father in the profession you at least need a "godfather" (i.e. a
prominent senior that you junior with) who can help guide you in the early years and
raise your profile, bringing you critical early cases. However, most seniors said they
accepted juniors on the request of friends, retired justices, or colleagues --- there was no
formal selection process. Thus it is beneficial, if not essential, to be located in this social
stratum in order to elicit the needed referral to a senior.

The powerful role of social networks in acquiring clients and setting up a practice
helps perpetuate the disproportionate presence of certain ethnic and religious groups in
the profession. For example, in Madras elite Brahmins dominate the upper ranks of the
bar because of their tight networks and long-standing proficiency in English. In Bombay,
the Parsis, Gujratis, and Bohra Muslims were early first movers in the profession and
continue to dominate its upper reaches.[^/21] In the Delhi High Court, post-partition refugees,
particularly Sikhs from the Lahore High Court had an advantage, and their descendants
continue to be disproportionately represented in the top ranks of the bar. The Supreme
Court bar tends to be an amalgam of these privileged groups from around the country.
Despite repeated inquiries we could not identify any Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe,
or Other Backward Class advocates who were regarded as part of the elite stratum of
lawyers.[^/22]



[^/21]: Marathi speakers dominate the bar of the less prestigious appellate side of the Bombay High Court.

[^/22]: Scheduled Caste is the official term for the groups formerly referred to as 'untouchables' or Depressed
Classes and more recently as Dalits; Scheduled Tribe is the official term for the many aboriginal peoples of
India; the "Other Backward Classes" are a set of groups officially determined to be underprivileged and,
like the SC and ST, entitled to be beneficiaries of government "affirmative action" programs, typically in
the form of "reservations" (i.e., quotas) in educational institutions and government jobs. These groups
comprise somewhere between one half and two thirds of the entire population of India. On the programs for
their advancement, _see_ Galanter 1984; Mendelsohn and Vicziany 1998; Thorat and Kumar 2008;
Deshpande 2011, Verma 2012.

Women also have had a difficult time breaking into the small group of Grand
Advocates and into the upper ranks of litigation more generally. Of the 81 _senior
advocates_ designated by the Bombay High Court in the 20 year period, 1991--2010, only
three were women. No women have been designated since 2006 (Menon: 2011).
Historically, women have faced discrimination from colleagues, judges, and clients, even
if there are signs such barriers may be lessening. As one seasoned woman lawyer
explained, "Women lawyers before me were not married. Clients didn't use to take you
seriously then. If you did get married then you moved with your husband so you
couldn't set up a practice. ... Some judges treated us well. Others were patronizing.
\[The discrimination\] ... isn't as bad now, but it hasn't totally vanished. I find if a woman
raises her voice they don't like it, even though a male could do the same thing." (Int5) In
2012, after a woman lawyer was slapped by a male colleague in the Delhi High Court, 63
women lawyers successfully petitioned the Supreme Court to set up a committee to
hear complaints of sexual harassment at the Supreme Court and in the lower courts
(Times of India: 2012). More women are entering litigation, but clearly discrimination
and obstacles still remain.

Many leading lawyers we interviewed bemoaned the deficiency of their own
formal schooling, although it frequently did provide them with future networking
resources. For example, many Bombay High Court lawyers are graduates of the
Government Law College, while many Delhi High Court lawyers are graduates of Delhi
University. During the 1990s, as law became a more fashionable field of study as
liberalization provided increasing opportunities for graduates, the National Law
Schools achieved prominence in legal education. These schools were originally created
to produce high quality publicly-minded litigators to strengthen the "public interest"
salient of the bar (Menon: 2009). However, graduates of the National Law Schools were
in marked demand by law firms and corporations flourishing in the post-liberalization
economy and many entered practice as in-house counsel or with firms in India and
abroad. Some though have entered litigation and are becoming an increasingly
prominent network in the courts.

In earlier generations, aspiring lawyers like Motilal Nehru, Mohandas Gandhi,
and Mohammed Ali Jinnah pursued a university education abroad (almost always in
Britain) and enrolled at the Inns of Court to qualify as barristers. But few of today's top
advocates were educated in other countries, perhaps in part because in the decades
after Independence, there were severe restrictions on foreign exchange and law had
lost its standing as a path for ambition. In recent years, far more rising lawyers have
gone abroad for education, particularly to obtain an LLM in the United States or United
Kingdom, perhaps signaling that foreign credentials are returning in importance.

Several top advocates used government positions to further their careers. In their
early years being a panel lawyer or standing counsel for a state government or public
sector undertaking could bring assured income and visibility. Later, being Assistant
Solicitor General, Solicitor General, or Attorney General often cemented an already
prominent reputation and brought advocates into the elite heights of the profession. One
lawyer discussed how he, "used these government jobs to work my way up." (Int8) Many
lawyers claimed they were simply asked one day to take on such a government
appointments, although others suggested securing such appointment required significant
networking. One well-known lawyer even cast aspersions on those taking political
appointments, saying, "For a political appointment you have to hob-nob with
industrialists and politicians. It's crony legalism." (Int9)

Another, less frequently taken, path to the upper ranks of the profession is to
become known for one's academic work, usually by writing a treatise in an area of law.[^/23]
As one lawyer who took this route explained, "When my first book came out my income
went up four times." (Int9) No full-time academic is known as a leading lawyer, likely in
part because academics are prohibited from practicing law in India (although
practitioners can and do hold appointments to teach) (Bar Council of India Rules, Part VI,
Ch II, Sect VII).

Public interest litigation (PIL), though only a tiny fraction of what the higher
courts do, plays an important role in the public image of the judiciary and in the self-perception
of the bar. Of the small set of lawyers who have a practice focused on public
interest cases, variously defined, there is a tiny subset who are regarded as peers of the
GAs. Such lawyers may be supported by a NGO or may be able to fund their operations
from their personal wealth. A few other GAs combine extensive PIL with a commercial
practice, while a large number of the top lawyers engage in occasional _pro bono_ work
that may include PIL or a prominent constitutional law or environmental matter. This
_pro bono_ work can help to establish an advocate's reputation in high profile matters
and later helps maintain public visibility while supporting a cause lawyers are
passionate about.[^/24] Relying too much on engaging in _pro bono_ type work though has
potential pitfalls for an aspiring senior lawyer. Advocates are designated _Senior
Advocates_ by the bench. This means that lawyers that are perceived to be too far
outside the mainstream may be overlooked for this designation by the judges.

For many GAs, the media offers an important means to gain and maintain
visibility. Advocates can be found regularly giving interviews on the news channels,
which have multiplied since liberalization. This practice is controversial amongst some
GAs who prefer to keep a low and, they argue, more dignified profile. They view
interviews as a form of advertisement, which is banned for lawyers in India. Yet, such
publicity, either through direct interviews or simply through newspaper reports about
their cases, has assured that many advocates have become familiar presences in middle
class households. For example, Ram Jethmalani, a well known criminal lawyer, had his
name referenced in 499 articles between 2009 and 2012 in the _Times of India_, a leading
English daily that also sets story trends for many local language papers. This was a
comparable amount of reporting to the most covered judges on the Court and far more
coverage than prominent law firms or law firm partners receive.


[^/23]: Such treatises, typically organized around the annotation of a statute, are the mainstay of the working
library of most Indian lawyers. Many of the classics of the genre were produced by practitioners.

[^/24]: As a side effect PIL cases provide work for other lawyers representing concerned clients. As one
prominent PIL lawyer recounted, "The big commercial lawyers are happy with me because I bring them
business. They have told me this several times. They must have earned crores from me." Interview 12.

Number of Articles in the _Times of India (ToI)_ from 2009 to 2012 Referencing (Source:
Factiva):

+-----------------------+-------------------+
| Judges                | References in ToI |
+=======================+==================:+
| Justice Sathisivam    | 524               |
+-----------------------+-------------------+
| Chief/Justice Kapadia | 491               |
+-----------------------+-------------------+
| Justice Aftab Alam    | 408               |
+-----------------------+-------------------+
| Justice Singhvi       | 369               |
+-----------------------+-------------------+
| Justice Kabir         | 265               |
+-----------------------+-------------------+
| Justice DK Jain       | 213               |
+-----------------------+-------------------+
| Justice Dattu         | 147               |
+-----------------------+-------------------+
| Justice Lodha         | 147               |
+-----------------------+-------------------+
: Table 2 - Public visibility of Judges.

+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Top Advocates/Prominent Law Firms/Partners | References in ToI |
+============================================+==================:+
| Prashant Bhushan                           | 638               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| GE Vahanvati                               | 568               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Ram Jethmalani                             | 499               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Harish Salve                               | 385               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Gopal Subramaniam                          | 368               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Shanti Bhushan                             | 233               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Mukul Rohtagi                              | 147               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| KK Venugopal                               | 145               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Abhishek Manu Singhvi                      | 139               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Darius Khambata                            | 133               |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Colin Gonsalves                            | 88                |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| PP Rao                                     | 83                |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Indira Jaising                             | 81                |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Soli Sorabjee                              | 70                |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Fali Nariman                               | 43                |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Amarchand Mangaldas                        | 27                |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| J Sagar                                    | 16                |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| AZB                                        | 10                |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Zia Mody                                   | 9                 |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Trilegal                                   | 5                 |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
| Cyril Shroff                               | 2                 |
+--------------------------------------------+-------------------+
: Table 3 - Public visibility of non-Judge legal professionals.

A few GAs contribute occasional _op-ed_ articles to the English-language
newspapers. Lawyers and judges in the upper reaches of the system are avid readers of
these papers, whose contents become generally known in these circles. Other lawyers
have used professional associations as part of their rise or as a signal of their clout.
Many leading advocates are or were Presidents of their respective High Court Bar
Associations, the Supreme Court Bar association, or the Bar Association of India.

# The Impact of GAs

The flourishing of Grand Advocates is intertwined with other features of the
Indian legal system, such as congested courts, insular social networks, overwhelmed
and under-resourced judges, and the centrality of the judiciary to Indian political life.
And their out-sized presence has numerous consequences for the legal system itself.

Many younger lawyers and briefing counsel view Grand Advocates with
resentment. One rising advocate repeated a common refrain that many of the top
lawyers are unnecessarily idealized by clients and judges, noting that, "We have given
up maharajas on elephants, but we still have this." (Int6)

Lawyers that we interviewed at law firms and in other practice settings often
reported that at the outset of their careers they had considered litigation, but thought
the field would be too difficult to break into given the social connections that were
perceived to be a prerequisite. They viewed workplaces like firms as providing a more
professional and meritocratic environment. Even as globalization has channeled more
money into the legal profession, the top rungs of litigation are still seen as an old boys'
network where social connections amongst a select community, and face value with
judges, are put at a premium. Indeed, these networks may be getting further entrenched
instead of swept away (Dezalay and Garth: 2010).

An older lawyer lamented what he saw as the decline of the profession led by the
Grand Advocates, "There is a lack of competence and discipline amongst the lawyers.
They no longer tell clients they have a frivolous case. They don't try to figure out the
best remedy based on cost-benefit analysis. Now it's just about familiarity of faces in the
Supreme Court and who can speak best." (Int7) As one senior commented, "In the old
days our role models were people like Seervai and Gupte[^/25] who didn't have massive
work or the most earnings. Now the role model is the lawyer who is earning most."
(Int27) A younger top leading lawyer described his generation as more "client and
service oriented while the older seniors are more classical. We are more aggressive in
my generation, less moral and not as much about the jurisprudence." (Int14)

Because their attention is spread so thinly amongst so many cases, some view
the GAs as hurting the quality of jurisprudence as they do not spend as much time as
they should developing their oral and written arguments resulting in poorly briefed
judges (Int33). Further, since GAs often have multiple matters scheduled on the same
day, they frequently have conflicts requiring judges to reschedule matters, contributing
to delays in the judicial system overall. GAs also price out many clients, meaning only
those who can afford these lawyers benefit from the distinct advantage they bring in
either receiving admission for their matter or more favorable orders (Galanter: 1974).

Despite these complaints, senior counsel frequently noted their positive impact
on the judicial system, upholding the rule of law. They commended themselves as a
check on overstepping or unaccountable judges. The GAs prize their independence from
firms and other corporate and government interests, which they view as giving them
the ability to speak out more readily if they see problems in the justice system.

Their generalist knowledge and prominent stature also enables GAs to more
actively push novel lines of argument in court, pushing jurisprudence in new directions.
Perhaps the best known example of this is the celebrated role _senior advocate_
Nanabhoy Palkhivala had in shaping the basic structure doctrine in the landmark
Supreme Court case _Kesavananda Bharati v. Union of India_, AIR 1973 SC 1461
(Andhyarujina: 2010: 19). In that case the Court held that there was a certain "basic
structure" to the Indian constitution that could not be amended, including its
democratic, federal and secular nature. Arguably having a preeminent lawyer
advocating for a controversial position allows judges more intellectual and reputational
cover to take a new jurisprudential initiative, particularly if the judges do not feel
confident in their own standing.


[^/25]: H.M. Seervai (1906--1996) was a distinguished Bombay lawyer and Constitutional scholar whose highly
respected commentary on the Indian Constitution, was first published in 1967. S.V. Gupte was a
distinguished Bombay lawyer who served as Attorney General of India during the 1977--79 Janata
government and was the author of a leading commentary in the field of Hindu law.

# Conclusion

If Motilal Nehru or Muhammad Ali Jinnah[^/26] visited the Supreme Court today they
would find a Court not altogether different than the Allahabad or Bombay High Courts
in which they argued in the early years of the 20th century. The multiple court rooms,
buzz of lawyers and clients in the hallways, and the structure of the bar would all seem
quite familiar. Independence, liberalization, and globalization may have changed some
of the clients, key provisions of law, and office technology --- briefs are now neatly typed
on a computer --- but many elements of the culture of the justice system have remained
surprisingly constant. In particular, the steeply hierarchical structure of the bar has
endured, suggesting that it is an expression of more deeply entrenched features of
Indian social life, or at least of Indian legal institutions. The reputational capital of the
Grand Advocate remains one of his primary assets in a court system marked by
overwhelmed judges with little assistance, the multiplicity and blurriness of precedent,
and the centrality of oral presentation. In such a context, being known and trusted by
judges is a positional good of which there can only be so much, placing those who have
it in both a potentially lucrative and commanding position in relation to the rest of the
bar.

Yet, there are signs that larger structural shifts are afoot that may affect the Grand
Advocate's privileged position in this system. Law firms are increasingly looking for
ways to bypass _senior advocates_. As one top firm partner indicated, "We have taken the
step of encouraging our own inhouse lawyers to argue. There are two reasons. First,
arguing counsel are hugely expensive and really unreliable. ... Second, it adds value for
money." (Int20) As more firms develop more of their own competent lawyers to argue
for them this may undercut some of the business of Grand Advocates. Eventually, senior
lawyers may even be brought into law firms where they can be given more extensive
infrastructure for research and case management. Currently, there is little incentive for
GAs to agree to such an arrangement because they would then lose the clients who
come to them through other law firms or briefing counsel and their reputational capital
is not shareable in the same way as a law firm partner's.

Meanwhile, the courts themselves are becoming less the exclusive site for
litigation, affecting the business model of the Grand Advocates. The development of
tribunals for tax, competition, telecom, airports, and other areas means that advocacy is
becoming increasingly specialized. It is more difficult for a GA to visit all these venues
compared to going from courtroom to courtroom in a High Court or the Supreme Court.
These tribunals are developing specialized bars and although some tribunal judges are
former High Court or Supreme Court judges, many of the other judges on the tribunal are
not even legally trained, meaning they are not well acquainted with the reputations of the
top lawyers, thus depriving them of much of their face value. Arbitration is also
increasingly attracting lawyers' time as companies try to avoid the delays and
unpredictability of the courts. Harish Salve, a prominent Indian _senior advocate_, joined
Blackstone Chambers in London in 2013 in a move designed to allow foreign companies
to more easily approach him to represent them in international arbitration or to consult
him regarding the Indian market.[^/27]


[^/26]: Muhammed Ali Jinnah (1876--1948) was a prominent lawyer in Bombay, a founder of the movement to
partition British India and create Pakistan, and that country's first Governor-General.

[^/27]: Ganz 2013. Salve continues to maintain a flourishing Delhi practice where he is well-known for
representing and advising Indian and multi-national corporate clients.

The proliferation of forums and the attendant specialization in the law is inducing
more lawyers to become experts in certain areas of law. Generalist advocates may
increasingly be relegated to procedural matters and points of natural justice, while more
substantive arguments about intellectual property or competition law gravitate to
specialists. Meanwhile, some Grand Advocates may voluntarily turn away from litigation
and spend less time in the courtroom, acting more as advisors or consultants to a client.
As one leading advocate explained, "Today where law ends is not clear. It is becoming a
mesh of consultancy and law. It's about policy." (Int10)

In addition, there are new pressures on GAs to increase the quality of their work.
As one lawyer noted, "It might not be specialization that brings the leading lawyers
down, but professionalization which requires more time on each case --- briefing, preparing
argument, and the court limiting its time so it's more content, less fluff." (Int13) Such
professionalization might be prompted by the entry of foreign law firms. These firms
would likely not litigate directly themselves and instead the initial effect of their arrival
would likely be an initial upsurge in demand for the service of the GAs. But over the long
run, as increasingly important customers of top advocates, they might demand higher
standards and more emphasis on reliability, leading to a narrowing of grand advocates'
famously sweeping portfolios.

A demand by clients for enhanced professional performance of GAs would be
more likely if it was also demanded, or at least rewarded, by judges. For example, if
judges admitted cases more selectively, punished lawyers for failing to appear at
hearings, and placed more reliance on written arguments (and less on often repetitious
oral advocacy) this might push GAs to more finely tune their briefs and schedules. Yet,
given the pay disparities between the bar and the bench, it is unlikely in the near-term
that a widespread improvement in the quality of judges will occur that might push for
more professionalization amongst GAs.

The increasing number of talented students entering legal education means that
there is a larger group of high quality young lawyers graduating each year. This group of
rising lawyers may eventually help professionalize standards in litigation. More broadly,
since so many of these top law graduates are now entering firms rather than litigation, the
balance of power within the profession may eventually shift away from litigators and
towards law firms and other forms of legal practice.

Studying the continuing vitality of segments of the bar like Grand Advocates
allows us to better understand how the law is actually practiced, applied, and produced
in India today. While some aspects of the legal profession may seem to be outwardly
"converging" in a country like India --- such as the increasing presence of domestic law
firms that look like those found elsewhere in the world --- the comparative uniqueness of
Grand Advocates demonstrates how certain structural features of a nation's legal
system can also generate and support a markedly divergent pattern of legal practice.

# Glossary

_Admission (miscellaneous) Days_

: At the Supreme Court justices hear requests for the
admission of a petition (generally on Monday and Friday). If accepted regular hearing is
(generally) on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday. Currently, all filings are heard by a
bench of at least two judges to decide whether a matter should be admitted for regular
hearing. If a case can be disposed of quickly through a short order it may be done so
during the admission hearing, instead of waiting for a regular hearing.

AOR \[Advocate on Record\]

: An advocate of at least four years experience who has passed
a specially designated exam that enables him or her to act and plead for a client in the
Supreme Court of India. The advocate must have an office within 16 kilometers of the
Supreme Court. Only AORs may file a case in the Supreme Court under the Supreme
Court Rules of 1966.

Blocking --- negative retainer

: When an advocate is paid a fee by a litigating party to not
appear for the opposing party.

Briefing or Instructing Counsel

: An advocate who does not argue a matter in court, but
instead briefs the arguing counsel on the matter, and is often charged with writing the
brief.

Constitution Bench

: A Supreme Court bench of five judges or more which hears a
substantial question of constitutional law.

Crore

: A unit of 100 lakhs or ten million.

Division Bench

: A bench of two judges, the standard format in the High Courts and now
the Supreme Court.

Face Value

: A colloquial term used to describe the perceived respect and deference a
judge treats an advocate with by way of his or her reputation.

Full Bench

: A bench of three judges.

Juniors

: Advocates who typically work for a _senior advocate_ at the beginning of their
career in a type of mentoring or apprenticeship relationship.

Lakh

: Unit of 100,000. _See also_ Crore.

Leading lawyer

: A lawyer recognized by other members of the legal community (judges,
lawyers, clients) to being one of the preeminent practicing attorneys at a given court.

_Mukhtar_

: In British India, originally unauthorized law agents, eventually recognized in 1879 as the lowest grade of lawyers, merged into the advocate category by the Advocates.
Act, 1961.

_Original Side_

: The jurisdiction of some of the High Courts extends to certain original civil
and criminal cases as well as to appeals and the Courts have separate rules, procedures
and dockets for these "_original side_" cases.

Panel lawyer

: A lawyer who is on a panel of lawyers who is contracted to a public or
private entity to appear, for a fee, on its behalf upon request.

Passover

: A judge's indulgence of a lawyer's non-appearance or unpreparedness when
his case is called, agreeing to call it again later in the session.

PIL \[Public Interest Litigation\]

: A writ petition brought in the public interest in a High
Court or Supreme Court to enforce a fundamental right of any citizen.

Pleader

: One of the several grades of legal practitioners before the profession was unified
by the Advocates Act, 1961. The pleaders practiced in the district courts, but could not
appear in the high courts without becoming an advocate.

Rajya Sabha

: The upper house of the Central legislature. Members of the Rajya Sabha are
predominantly selected by state legislative assemblies. Service in the upper house is not
considered a full time government job and those who serve there are not disqualified
from practicing law.

Regular Hearing Day

: Generally Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday at the Supreme
Court. When judges hear admitted matters to dispose of them through final orders. Judges
typically hear more cases on admission days than regular hearing days. Miscellaneous
matters (which might involve requests for interim orders, the addition or subtraction of
parties, or other "miscellaneous" matters) may be heard on either admission or regular
hearing day. The Supreme Court at different times in its history has heard admission and
regular hearing matters on the same day or on different days than it does now.

_Senior Advocate_

: A honorific designation, conferred on an advocate by a High Court or
the Supreme Court under the Advocates Act of 1961, based on the advocate's high
standing in the Bar or special knowledge or experience in law.

SLP \[Special Leave Petition\]

: A petition to the Supreme Court under Article 136 of the
Constitution of India by which the Supreme Court through its discretion can choose to
hear any appeal.

_Vakalatnama_

: Letter of authority from client to attorney.

_Vakil_

: Originaly an agent, a person invested with authority to act for another, an
ambassador or representative. In British India a practitioner authorized to appear in law
courts, a grade of legal practitoners lower than barristers and advocates, but higher than
pleaders. Merged into the advocate category by the Advocated Act, 1961 but the term is
in wide use as a synonym for lawyer.

_Zamindar_

: A landlord (usually large), who had duties to collect revenue from, and rights
of governance over, his tenants. _Zamindars_ were abolished by various land reform acts in
the 1950s and 1960s.

# Bibliography

::: {#refs}

\ 

Abel, Richard & Lewis, Philip (1988) Lawyers in Society: _The Common Law World_.
Berkeley: Univ. of California Press.

\ 

Andhyarujina, T.R. (2010) "A Genius in Advocacy" in Kumar ed., _Nani Palkhivala: A Role
Model_. New Delhi: Universal Law Publishing.

\ 

Baxi, Upendra (1986) "The Pathology of the Indian Leal Professions," _Indian Bar Review_
13: 455--484.

\ 

Bernstein, Marver (1977) _Regulating Business by Independent Commissions_. Ann Arbor:
Greenwood Publishing Group.

\ 

Bhushan, Shanti (2008) _Courting Destiny_: A Memoir. New Delhi: Penguin.

\ 

Buckee, G.F.M (1972) _An Examination of the Development and Structure of the Legal
Profession at Allahabad_, 1866--1935' (Unpublished PhD thesis, London, 1972).

\ 

Burrage, Michael (2006) _Revolution and the Making of the Contemporary Legal Profession:
England, France, and the United States_. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

\ 

Calkins, Philip B. (1968--69) "A Note on Lawyers in Muslim India," _Law & Society
Review_ 3: 403--406.

\ 

_Centenary/High Court of Judicature at Allahabad 1866--1966_. 2 vols. Allahabad:
Allahabad High Court Centenary Celebration Committee, 1966.

\ 

Chagla, M.C. (1974) _Roses in December: An Autobiography_. Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya
Bhavan.

\ 

Chandrachud, Abhinav (2012) "Supreme Court's Seniority Norm," _Economic and
Political Weekly_. Feb. 25.

\ 

Chandrachud, Abhinav (2012) "The Need to Have a Uniform Retirement Age for Judges," 46
_Economic and Political Weekly_ 24--27.

\ 

Civil Justice Committee 1924--25 (1925), _Report_. (Calcutta: Government of India Central
Publication Branch).

\ 

Daily News & Analysis (DNA) (2012) "Bangalore clash: Karnataka lawyers to boycott
courts on Monday," Mar, 4.

\ 

Derrett, J.D.M. (1963) "Justice, Equity and Good Conscience" in J.N.D. Anderson (ed.),
_Changing. Law in Developing Countries_ 114--53 London: George Allen & Unwin.

\ 

Deshpande, Ashwini (2011) _The Grammar of Caste: Economic Discrimination in
Contemporary India_. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

\ 

Dezalay, Yves and Garth, Bryant (2010) _Asian Legal Revivals: Lawyers in the Shadow of
Empire_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

\ 

Dhavan, Rajeev (1977) _The Supreme Court of India: A Socio-Legal Critique of its Juristic
Techniques_. New Delhi: India Law Institute.

\ 

Dhavan, Rajeev (1986) _Litigation Explosion in India_. New Delhi: India Law Institute.

\ 

Dhawan, Himanshi (2011) "Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Vijay Mallya are Top Earners in
Rajya Sabha," _Times of India_, Nov. 18, 2011.

\ 

Epp, Charles R. (1998) _The Rights Revolution: Lawyers, Activists, and Supreme Courts in
Comparative Perspective_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

\ 

Frank, Robert and Robert Cook (1996) _The Winner Take All Society_. Penguin Books.

\ 

Gadbois, George H. (1963) "Evolution of the Federal Court of India: an historical
footnote." _Journal of the Indian Law Institute_ 5:19--46.

\ 

Galanter, Marc (1968--69) "Introduction: The Study of the Indian Legal Profession," 3 _Law &
Society Rev_. 201--218.

\ 

Galanter, Marc (1974) "Why the 'Haves' Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the Scope and
Limits of Legal Change," 9 _Law & Society Rev_. 95--160.

\ 

Galanter, Marc (1984) _Competing Equalities: Law and the Backward Classes in India_.
Berkeley: Univ. of California.

\ 

Galanter, Marc and Palay, Thomas M. (1991) _Tournament of Lawyers: The Transformation
of the Big Law Firm_. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

\ 

Galanter, Marc, Goonesekere, Savitri and Twining, William (1996) _Report on the Expert
Panel on the National Law School of India University_.

\ 

Gandhi, JS (1982) _Lawyers and Touts: A Study in the Sociology of the Legal Profession_. New
Delhi: Hindustan Publishing.

\ 

Gandhi, JS (1987) _Sociology of Legal Profession, Law and Legal System: The Indian
Setting_. Delhi: Gian Publishing House.

\ 

Gandhi, JS (1988) "Past and Present: A Sociological Portrait of the Indian Legal Profession,"
in Abel ed., _Lawyers in Society: Vol. 1, The Common Law World_. Berkeley: Univ. of
California Press.

\ 

Gandhi, M\[ohandas\] K\[aramchand\] (1962) _The Law and the Lawyers_. (compiled and
edited by S.B. Kher) Ahmedabad: Navajivan Publishing House.

\ 

Ganz, Kian (2010) "No first timers pass latest Bombay solicitors exam ... ," _Legally India_,
June 21.

\ 

Ganz, Kian (2013) "RTI Reveals: 1.3 million advocates," _Legally India_, Feb. 18.

\ 

Ganz, Kian (2013) "Harish Salve, Fast-Tracked to English Bar," _Legally India_, July 19.

\ 

Gias, Shoaib A (2010) "Miscarriage of Chief Justice: Judicial Power and the Legal Complex
in Pakistan under Musharraf," 35(4) _Law & Social Inquiry_ 985--1022.

\ 

Halliday, Terrence & Karpik, Lucien, eds. (2011) _Fates of Political Freedom: The Legal
Complex in the British Post-Colony_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

\ 

Hidayatullah, M. (1980) _My Own Boswell: Memoirs_. New Delhi: Arnold-Heinemann.

\ 

_Hindustan Times_ (1982) "Bar Association on the warpath," May 6.

\ 

Hirsch, Fred (1976) _Social Limits to Growth_. London: Routledge.

\ 

_IBNLive_ (2012) "Lawyers strike disrupts 2G scam case hearing," Aug. 11.

\ 

Indian Bar Committee 1923--24 \[1924\] Delhi: Government Central Press.

\ 

Institute of Developing Economies (2001) _Judicial System and Reforms in Asian Countries:
The Case of India_. New Delhi: India Law Institute.

\ 

Jain, M.P. (1966) _Outlines of Indian Legal History_ 2d ed. Bombay: N.M. Tripathi.

\ 

Jeejeebhoy, J.R.B. (1939) _Dr. Sir Chimanlal H. Setalvad: A Biography_. Bombay:
Chandrakant H. Mehta.

\ 

Kidder, Robert L. (1974) "Formal Litigation and Professional Insecurity: Legal
Entrepreneurship in South India," _Law & Society Review_ 9:11--37.

\ 

Krishnaswami Aiyar, K.V. (1953) _Professional Conduct and Advocacy: being a series of
lectures delivered to apprentices-at-law_. 3d ed. Madras: Oxford University Press.

\ 

Kumar, Nilendra (ed.) (2004) _Nani Palkhivala: A Role Model_. New Delhi: Universal Law
Publishing Co.

\ 

Law Commission of India (1958), _Fourteenth Report: Reform of Judicial Administration_. 2 vols. (Government of India, Ministry of Law).

\ 

Law Commission of India (1988) _One Hundred Thirty-First Report: Role of Legal
Profession in Administration of Justice_.

\ 

Mack, Elmar (1955) _Mainly Scripts and Touts_. Madras: Higgenbothams Ltd.

\ 

Madsen, Stig Toft (1984) "Ripples on the Plains: Lawyers, Clients and Legal networks in
Western Uttar Pradesh," _Folk_ 26: 93--120.

\ 

Mahajan, Mehr Chand (1963) _Looking Back: The Autobiography of Mehr Chand
Mahajan/Former Chief Justice of India_. London: Asia Publishing House.

\ 

Majumdar, N,.Dutt (1974), _Conduct of Advocates & Legal Profession: Short History_.
Calcutta: Eastern Law House.

\ 

Mattei, Ugo & Pes, Luca (2009) "Civil Law and Common Law: Toward Convergence?" in
Caldeira ed., _The Oxford Hanbook of Law and Politics_. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

\ 

Mavalankar, G.V. (1955) _My Life at the Bar_. New Delhi: Hindustan Times.

\ 

Mendelsohn, Oliver & Vicziany, Marika (1998) _The Untouchables: Subordination,
Poverty and the State in Modern India_. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

\ 

Menon, Madhava, ed. (1984) _The Legal Profession: A Preliminary Study of the
Tamilnadu Bar_. New Delhi: Bar Council of India Trust.

\ 

Menon, Madhava (2009) _Turning Point: The Story of a Law Teacher_. New Delhi: Universal
Law Publishing.

\ 

Menon, Meena (2011) "Women as _senior advocates_, any takers?" _The Hindu_, Sept. 25.

\ 

Menon, Ramesh (1986) "Legal Wrangle," _India Today_, Dec. 31, 1986, p. 19.

\ 

Merryman, J.H., (1987) "On the Convergence (and the Divergence) of the Civil Law and the
Common Law," 17 _Stanford J of Int L_ 357--88.

\ 

Misra, B.B. (1961) _The Indian Middle Classes: Their Growth in Modern Times_ (London:
Oxford University Press).

\ 

Mitra, Sumit "Legal Eagles," _India Today_, Mar. 31, 1997 pp. 74--82.

\ 

McKinstry, Sam W. (1974) _The Brokerage Role of the Indian Lawyer: A Law and Society
Approach_ (Ph. D. Dissertation, University of Missouri).

\ 

Moog, Robert (1992) "Delays in the Indian Courts: Why the Judges Don't Take Control," 16
_Justice System J_ 19--36.

\ 

Moog, Robert (1997) _Whose Interests are Supreme? Organizational Politics in the Civil
Courts in India_. Ann Arbor: Assn for Asian Studies.

\ 

Morrison, Charles (1968--69) "Social Organization at the District Courts: Colleague
Relationships among Indian Lawyers," 3 _Law & Society Rev_. 251--267.

\ 

Morrison, Charles (1972) Kinship in Professional Relations: A Study of North Indian
District Lawyers," _Comparative Studies in Society and History_ 14: 100--128.

\ 

Morrison, Charles (1974) "Clerks and Clients: Paraprofessional Roles and Cultural
Identities in Indian Litigation," _Law & Society Review_ 9: 39--61.

\ 

Nagpaul, Hans (1994) "The Legal Profession in Indian Society: A Case Study of Lawyers at
a Local Level in North India," 22 _Int'l J of the Sociology of Law_ 59--76.

\ 

Narang, Prashant (2011 "Regulatory Barriers to Litigation in India," _Asian Journal of
Law and Economics_ 2(3): article 4.

\ 

Nariman, Fali S. (2010) _Before Memory Fades: An Autobiography_. New Delhi: Hay
House.

\ 

Niles, Russell (1963) "Ethical Prerequisites to Certification of Special Proficiency," 49
_American Bar Association Journal_ 83--89.

\ 

Oommen, T.K. (1983) "The Legal Profession in India: Some Sociological Perspectives" 10
_Indian Bar Rev_ 1--46.

\ 

_Overseas Hindustan Times_ (1982) "Bar Association on the warpath," May 6, 1982.

\ 

Paul, John (1986) _Vakils of Madras, 1902--1928: The Rise of the Modern Legal
Profession in South India_ (Ph. D. thesis, Department of History, University of
Wisconsin --- Madison).

\ 

Posner, Eric & Dixon, Rosalind (2010) "The Limits of Constitutional Convergence," 11 U
_Chi J. of Int'l L._ 399--423.

\ 

Price, Pamela "Ideology and Ethnicity under British Imperial Rule: 'Brahmins,' Lawyers
and Kin-Caste Rules in Madras Presidency" (1989) _Modern Asian Studies_ 23:151--177.

\ 

Rajamani, Lavanya & Sengupta, Arghya (2010) "The Supreme Court of India: Power,
Promise, and Overreach," in Jaya ed., _The Oxford Companion to Politics in India_. New
Delhi: Oxford University Press.

\ 

Robinson, Nick (2009) "Expanding Judiciaries: India and the Rise of the Good Governance
Court," 8(1) _Wash U Global Studies Law Rev_. 1--70.

\ 

Robinson, Nick _et al._ (2011) "Interpreting the Constitution: Supreme Court Constitution
Benches Since Independence," 56(9) _Ec. and Pol. Weekly_ 28--31.

\ 

Robinson, Nick (2013) "Structure Matters: The Impact of Court Structure on the Indian and
US Supreme Courts," 61(1) _Am. J. of Comp. Law_ 173--208.

\ 

Robinson, Nick (2013) "A Quantitative Analysis of the Indian Supreme Court's Workload,"
_J. of Emp. L. Studies_ (forthcoming).

\ 

Rocher, Ludo (1968--69) "Lawyers in Classic Hindu Law," 3 _Law & Society Rev_. 383--402.

\ 

Sahay, Nawal Kishor (1931) _A Short History of the Indian Bar_.

\ 

Sathe, S.P, Shaila Kunchur and Smita Kashikar (1984) "Legal Profession --- Its
Contribution to Social Change: A Survey of the Pune City Bar," _ICSSR Research
Abstracts Quarterly_ 13: 111--127.

\ 

Schmitthener, Samuel (1968--69) "A Sketch of the Development of the Legal Profession in
India," 3 _Law & Society Rev_. 337--382.

\ 

Setelvad, Chimanlal H. (1946) _Recollections & Reflections: An Autobiography_. Bombay:
Padma Publications.

\ 

Setalvad, Motilal C. (1960) _The Common Law in India_. London: Stevens and Sons.

\ 

Setelvad, Motilal C. (1971) _My Life: Law and Other Things Bombay_: N.M. Tripathi Pvt.
Ltd.

\ 

Sharma, K.L. (1984) _Sociology of Law & Legal Profession: A Study of Relations between
Lawyers and Clients_. Jaipur: Rawat Publications.

\ 

Shrivastava, Prachi (2012) "PXV's Mohit Abraham on the record: How to top the advocateson-record (AOR) exam & other secrets," _Legally India_, Jan. 25.

\ 

Simpleman, Jr., A. (1986) "Sentimental Metaphors," 34 _UCLA Law Rev_ 537--76.

\ 

Soni, Brahm Dev (1956) _Lawyers of Dehra Dun: A Study of the Sociology of the Legal
Profession_ (Survey Report submitted for M.A. (Final) Sociology Examination, Agra
University.

\ 

Sundquist, Mathew Lee (2010) "Learned in Litigation: Former Solicitors General in the
Supreme Court Bar," 5(1) _Charleston Law Rev_ 59--97.

\ 

Supreme Court of India, _Senior Advocates_ of the Supreme Court (2011)
[http://www.supremecourtofindia.nic.in/circular/senioradvocates.pdf](http://www.supremecourtofindia.nic.in/circular/senioradvocates.pdf) (accessed 4 August 2013).

\ 

Sweet, Alec Stone (1992) _The Birth of Constitutional Politics in France: The Constitutional
Council in Comparative Perspective_. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

\ 

Tek Chand, \[Bakshi\] (1935), _The Law of Legal Practitioners in British India_. Calcutta:
Eastern Law House.

\ 

The Bar Council, Statistics, http://www.barcouncil.org.uk/about-the-bar/facts-and-figures/statistics/ (accessed 4 August 2013).

\ 

_Times of India_ (2011) "Himanshi Dhawan, Abhishek Manu Singhvi, Vijay Mallya are Top
Earners in Rajya Sabha," Nov. 18.

\ 

_Times of India_ (2012) "Panel to look into sexual harassment cases within SC premises
created," Oct. 10.

\ 

_The Hindu_ (2011) "Anna Hazare, others declare assets," April 16.

\ 

Tushnet, Mark (2009) "The Inevitable Globalization of Constitutional Law," 49 _Virginia J. of
Int'l L_. 985--1006.

\ 

Tyabji, Husain B. (1952) _Badruddin Tyabji: a biography_. Bombay: Thacker & Co.

\ 

Vachha, P.B. (1962), _Famous Judges, Lawyers and Cases of Bombay_ \[ Reprinted in 2011
with an introduction by Soli J. Sorabji\] New Delhi: Universal.

\ 

Verma, Vidhu (2012) _Non-Discrimination and Equality in India: Contesting Boundaries
of Social Justice_. London: Routledge.

\ 

Weiss, Debra Cassens (2008) "Indian Lawyers Handling Outsourced Work Do More Than
Document Review," _ABA Law Journal_, May 12.

\ 

Wilkins, David. (2012) "Is the In-House Counsel Movement Going Global? A Preliminary
Assessment of the Role of Internal Counsel in Emerging Economies," 2 _Wisc. L. Rev_. 251304.

:::
