# THE SEPARATION OF POWER

The separation of powers doctrine, as an emanation of the rule of law values, has been a discrete area for judicial pronouncements in India. It has been acknowledged in a long line of Indian decisions that the Constitution does not envisage any strict separation of powers. Apart from the directive principle embodied in Article 50 which enjoins separation of judiciary from executive, the constitutional scheme does not countenance any dogmatic division of powers. For example, the President of India has wide legislative powers. Of his wide power to promulgate ordinances during the recess of the Houses of Parliament, it has been said that its “extent and scope… would have been envied by Henry VIII and would have taken the Judges of the Case of Proclamations by surprise”.[^17] The system of Presidential rule in the states provides another example.[^18] When the separation of powers doctrine was urged in the fifties as denying, or in the alternative substantively restraining, wide grants of delegated legisative powers to the executive, the Supreme Court upheld such delegation, subject to certain limitations, but in essence denying the existence of the doctrine in the Indian constitutional scheme.

Apart from the difficulties in contemplating and maintaining any rigid doctrine of separation of powers in contemporary conditions, with declining role of legislative institutions in the domain of lawmaking and the progressively increasing domination in all spheres by the executive, there is also the inherent difficulty in defining in workable terms the division of powers into legislative, executive and judicial. Experience has shown (e.g. the tortuous endeavours to distinguish quasi-judicial from administrative power) that even if the doctrine of separation of powers were to be grasped as merely involving division of functions, demarcating lines among the various functions of the government are equally difficult to draw. The Supreme Court has made recently one valiant attempt to identify the essential feature of judicial power—namely adjudication of specific disputes—which it denied to the constituent body, that is Parliament, acting under the amending powers of the Constitution by virtue of Article 368.[^19] But this effort, problematic as it is at its own intrinsic level,[^20] is not of decisive relevance for the development of administrative law though it may be so for the exercise of constituent power itself in the future.

[^17]: Kagzi, p. 20.

[^18]: See R. Dhavan, President’s Rule in States, 1978, Indian Law Institute.

[^19]: Indira Nehru Gandhi v. Raj Narain, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 2299.

[^20]: U. Baxi, “Some Reflections on the Nature of Constituent Power” in R. Dhavan and A. Jacob (ed.), Indian Constitution: Trends and issues, 1978, p. 122.
