# DELEGATED LEGISLATION

The important issue concerning the constitutionality of delegated legislation arose soon upon Independence in the Supreme Court's advisory opinion in the Delhi Laws case.[^21] Prior to Independence, the doctrine of conditional legislation held sway by virtue of tho landmark ruling of the Privy Council in Queen v. Burah.[^22] Conditional legislations granting executive many powers---for example to extend the life of the Act by a period, or to bring into force an Act duly passed or to extent the pecuniary jurisdiction of civil courts to a precise maximum amount---were upheld, although with circumspection.[^23]

Upon the adoption of the Constitution, the question of the constitutional validity of delegated legislation was argued at great length in advisory proceedings in Delhi Laws. The Central government was not merely authorized to extend to the Union territory of Delhi laws existing or to be made in future by any State but, if necessary, to adapt and modify these. The authorization extended beyond extensive modifications of such laws to the repeal of any existing laws in force in the territory and their substitution by other laws from time to time. The scope of delegated legislation thus entailed was very wide indeed.

In a complex set of opinions, the Supreme Court negatived the contention that the doctrine of separation of powers forbade delegation of legislative authority. The argument that the legislature was an agent of the people and cannot further delegate its lawmaking powers was explicitly rejected. If delegation of power to the executive was not _per se_ invalid, was there to be no limit to the powers that can be delegated? The Court formulated the general limit of delegation in terms of a broad formula; what cannot be delegated, it said, is the essential legislative function. This function consisted in the "determination of legislative policy and its formulation as a rule of conduct"[^24] Excessive delegation would arise when the legislature left the executive to perform even these tasks. But the application of this general test was no easy affair even in the very case in which it was formulated. The power to extend without modification Central and Provincial Acts, both present and future, was upheld by five votes to two. The authority to apply existing and future legislations with alterations and modifications was also similarly upheld. The power to repeal existing laws and to substitute new ones was held ultra vires by a narrow margin in a four to three vote. Three Justices formulated limits of delegation of legislative power more generously at "effacement" or "abdication". Parliament may not destroy its legislative powers by delegation; it may not abandon its control over the delegate; nor may it create new legislative power not contemplated in the Constitution. In each of the three situations the charge of excessive delegation would be attracted.[^25] Neither the test of abdication nor that of "essential legislative function" helped the Court to arrive at a unanimity of outcome in any of the categories presented to it in this reference.

A large number of subsequent decisions has shown that it is difficult, in practice, for anyone to sustain the charge of excessive delegation. Whether the legislature had performed the task of formulating the legislative policy while making the grant of wide delegated powers of rule-making to the executive is a question which the courts have answered, again and again, by discovery and imputation of policy to legislations which ex facie did not disclose these.[^26] All too often even the vaguest declarations of policy intent and objective in the preambulatory recitals have been considered sufficient for the purposes of sustaining delegated legislation. Rarely has a judge taken pains to declare that the essential legislative function cannot be performed "by vague and general declaration of policy" but that it required a definite policy controlling and regulating the powers conferred on the executive for carrying into effect that policy"[^27] But even such declaration has been made only in a dissenting opinion. As late as 1974, Mr. Justice Mathew felt that the dignity of judicial process is impaired by judicial attempts to somehow find the formulation of essential legislative policies in the vacuous generalities of the delegating statutes. He observed that "the hunt by court for legislative the policy or guidance in the crevices of a statute or nook and cranny of its preamble is not an edifying spectacle"[^28] He proposed the test (and was himself to apply it in a problematic decision later) that counts may invalidate delegation of legislative power only when there is a clear showing of abdication of legislative power by the legislature, indeed to a point that it has foregone even its power to repeal or revoke the power from the delegate.[^29] In the result, a very wide judicial benediction to transfer of legislative power to the executive continues unabated.

For example, the entire structure of regulation of import and export trade is built on the skeletal statute of eight sections; the regulatory process on the Essential Commodities Act springs from a similar skeletal statute of sixteen sections.[^30] The bulk of delegated legislation is on constant increase. For example, the Indian Parliament passed from the period 1973 to 1977 a total of 302 laws; as against this, the total number of statutory rules and orders (on a rough count) passed in the same period was approximately 25, 114. Corresponding figures for states and union territories are not available; but the number of rules issued under delegated power may well be astronomical.[^31] In a recent decision, the Supreme Court has acknowledged this magnitude of executive power but has not been able to find any strategy of coping with it.[^32]

Nor is this all. There exist no functional equivalents of judicial control over executive law-making, either. No doubt, some sort of legislative control over this power is exercised by the Committees on Subordinate Legislation of both Houses of Parliament. On available information, the Committees do useful work in raising questions concerning the vires of certain rules or procedures, provide suggestions for additional procedural safeguards and issue general guidelines from time to time (such as the need for publication, to limit ouster or restriction of judicial review, and for provision of standards structuring discretion). All this is no doubt useful.[^33] The question whether this procedure does effectively control excessive delegation and sub-delegation and actual exercise of powers is a different one and remains open for empirical investigation. In any case the Committees have no censorial role on the policies underlying the rules. We have little corresponding information on the mechanism of legislative control over delegated legislation in the States. One may venture to presume then that the extent of delegated legislation, uncontrolled either by judicial or legislative oversight, is very large indeed. There is in India no a priori ground compelling the conclusion that such untrammelled powers of executive lawmaking are essential for the attainment of the goals of the Constitution or for attaining administrative efficiency, although this is offered, parrot-like, as the justification for such powers. On the other hand, there is ample indication that people affected by exercise of delegated legislative power have no real access to executive law which may determine their status adversely; the requirement of publication in the official gazette, although salutary, just does not structure effective access to information through the vastness of India.[^34] The absence of legal services programmes is another aspect of the access problem, which gets. aggravated especially when executive legislation occurs in the area of redistributive equities.[^35] The inability of devising appropriate controls over this is an aspect of the current crisis of the Indian legal system.

[^21]: _In re_ Delhi Laws Act, A.I.R, 1951 S.C. 332.

[^22]: (1978), 3 A.C. 889. _Also see_ Sathe, pp. 69--74.

[^23]: E.g., Inder Singh v. State of Rajasthan, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 510; Emperor V. Benoari Lal, AIR. 1945 P.C. 48; State of Bombay y, Narottamdas, AIR. 1951 S.C. 69

[^24]: Per Kania, C.J.; _see also_ Harishankar Bangla V.M.P. State, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 465, 468 where the essential legislative function was formulated as consisting in "the determination or choice of legislative policy and of formally enacting that policy into a binding rule of conduct".

[^25]: _See_ the summation of outcomes in the Delhi laws in Raj Narain v. Chairman, Patna Administration, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 569.

[^26]: Jain and Jain, pp. 33--48.

[^27]: _See_ the dissenting opinion of Justice Subba Rao in Vasantlal Maganbhai v. State of Bombay, AIR. 1961 S.C. 4.

[^28]: Gwalior Rayon Silk Mfg. (Wvg.) Co. Ltd. v. A.C.S.T., (1974) 4 S.C.C. 98, 122; AIR. 1974 S.C. 1660.

[^29]: M K. Papiah & Sons v. Excise Commissioner, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 1007; _see_ U. Baxi, Introduction' to K.K Mathew's Democracy, Freedom and Equality pp. xxvi-xxvii, and pp. iii-v, 1977, Eastern Book Co.

[^30]: _See_ Jain and Jain, pp. 33--36.

[^31]: _See_ U. Baxi, The Crisis of the Indian Legal System, Vikas Publishing House, New Delhi, (Alternatives in Development: Law, mimeo, being a paper presented for the Indian Council of Social Science Research, at a workshop at Poona University, June 1976).

[^32]: Avinder Singh v. State of Punjab, (1979) 1 S.C.C. 137, 160.

[^33]: Jain and Jain, pp. 57--66; Sathe, pp. 108--16.

[^34]: The courts have done their best to insist on publicity through gazette. _See_ the recent decision in Govindlal v. Agricultural Produce Market Conmiltee, A.I.R. 1976 S.C. 263.

[^35]: _See_ U. Baxi, "Legal Assistance to the Poor: A Critique of the Expert Committee Report", 1975, Economic and Political Weekly, p. 1005.
