# ADMINISTRATIVE DIRECTIONS

The phenomenon of intra and inter-departmental directions or instructions provides an additional weapon in the arsenal of the administrative State. Wide powers of delegation and sub-delegation, and conferral of enormous discretionary powers on the executive thus stand reinforced by the institution of directions. _Prima facie_, such directions bind only the administrators; they do not create changes in individual's rights or status.[^72] Directions do not have any statutory force as compared with rules and regulations under statutory powers.[^73] But courts have not always found it easy to provide crystal-clear points of distinction between directions and rules. Many variables emerge here: " ... the form of pronouncement, the procedure ... followed by the administration in issuing directions, rules or regulations, nature of rights involved" have been mentioned in judicial decisions as relevant variables.[^74]

It is clear that the government cannot issue directions to quasi-judicial authorities performing tasks of administrative adjudication.[^75] Even a body performing executive or legislative functions, may not be subjected to executive directions if the statute does not explicitly authorise this. In one case at least, as a result of a negative judicial verdict a statute had to be amended so as to authorize the issue of governmental directions.[^76] But generally statutes so provide expansively.

From a victim-oriented perspective of administrative law, one may wonder whether extensive powers to issue directions to administrative authorities are really justified. This question arises because directions can often effectively impinge on rights and create obligations for individuals. No doubt these can be questioned and rendered unenforceable by proper litigative strategies. Such strategies have to cope with the problems of identification of governmental directions, a problem for which there are no determinate judicial guidelines. There is also an additional problem of access to information as the multitude of directions issued in a wide variety of statutory contexts are rarely available in a published form. Publication of directions is itself a discretionary function of the executive. The problem of identification of directions and that of continuing access to them poses difficulties for devising successful litigative strategies. Therefore, while notionally directions cannot be enforced through courts, they do operate, in quite a few sectors, as vehicles of administrative action, and even domination,[^77] in addition to the vast powers of delegated legislation and discretion already heavily vested in the administration. One hopes that the new ferment in the Indian administrative jurisprudence since 1977 will extend to this problem of directions by devising more stringent patterns of accountability in administrative action.


[^72]: _Ibid._ But often directions have been enforced: sce Union of India v. K.P. Joseph, A.I.R. 1973; S.C. 303: State of Uttar Pradesh v. Chandra Mohan, A.I.R. 1977 S.C. 2411. _See also_ Dist. Registrur V. M.B. Koyakutti, (1979) 2 S.C.C. 150, 155 for a reiteration of the view that if there are gaps in statutory rules, "Government can supplement the rule by issuing administrative instructions not inconsistent with the statutory provisions already framed or enacted." _Cf._ Bant Singh v. Man Singh, A.I.R. 1977 P & H 102

[^73]: Jain and Jain, p. 96: Raman & Raman v. State of Madras, AIR. 1959 S.C. 694.

[^74]: Jain and Jain, p. 97; _also see_ Rajgopala Naidhi v. State Transport Appellate Tribunal, AIR. 1964 S.C. 1573.

[^75]: Ram Vilas Service v. Road Traffic Board, A.J.R. 1948 Med 400.

[^76]: _Cf._ Jain and Jain, p. 100, who raise this question call the situation only inconvenient and "confusing" for the individual. Certainly, it is more than just this. Directions have often been issued to stay or postpone effective implementation of duly enacted laws and their provisions, notably redistributive laws. This deprives citizens of the regime of benefits. Such a process is akin to an executive "stay" of legislative action, practised more frequently, but less visibly, than "stay orders" of the judiciary. This is an aspect of governmental lawlessness in India. _See_ U. Baxi, The Crisis of the Indian Legal System, Vikas Publishing House, New Delhi.

[^77]: A T. Markose, pp. 56--102.
