# THE PROBLEM OF LIMITS TO FAIRNESS DISCIPLINE

Modern administration not only legislates for citizens and exercises wide, often uncanalized, executive powers over their lives in almost all areas of their lives, but it also adjudicates. Although administrative adjudication was not altogether miniscule in colonial India, after Independence its growth has been phenomenal.[^78] There has been a steady expansion in contemporary India of justice by tribunals, whose nature, scope, personnel and structure vary enormously.[^79] Legislatures creating these tribunals attempt to impose certain fairness discipline, favouring the victim of administrative deviance, by providing many a procedural safeguard, expressed through the rolled-up phrase “rules of natural justice”. They also provide for relative autonomy for tribunals; at the same time the scope of linkages between tribunals and courts is also structured through statutes. Some tribunals are given discretion to refer complex matters of law to High Courts through the “case stated” procedure. Statutes also provide for the exclusion of judicial intervention by the “ouster” clauses.[^80] But this kind of structuring has often proved fragile, in view of the overarching powers of the Supreme Court under Articles 32 and 136 of the Constitution and that of the High Courts under Articles 226 and 227. The attempt made by the emergency 42 amendment to the Constitution to immunize tribunals from often excessive, and sometimes wayward, invigilation by High Courts through limiting their Article 226 jurisdiction[^81] was cancelled by a nullifying amendment after the emergency. The result is that while India has a flourishing range of adjudicative tribunals, it does not have any integrated system of tribunals nor any jurisprudential theory for the place or status of tribunals in the legal system. Both the higher courts as well as the legislatures continue to compete to impose their standards of fairness on tribunals. The rate of success in this enterprise is another matter.

As noted, the legislatures have imported certain rules of natural justice in structure and function of the tribunals. This in any case is commanded by the provisions of fundamental rights. Indian courts have, also by the constitutional compulsions, moved in the direction of classifying administrative adjudication as “quasi-judicial” and have imposed relatively strict fairness discipline on them. They have endeavoured to extend this classification, and even the regime of discipline, to bodies which may only relatively loosely be called tribunals.[^82]

More problematic, however, is the situation of administrative decision occurring outside the area of tribunalization. Is such action to be tamed by the requirements of fairness? If so, how is it to be done consistent with the claims of administrative efficiency and accountability and the institutional capabilities of the judicial system? The mix of claims and considerations here is so complex that one . would a priori suggest that judicial policies will be uncertain, changeful and incapable of juristic systematization at any given point of time. Such an a priori answer would be, for a change, quite right. Let us trace, briefly, the evolution of judicial response on the matter.

It is clear that if the statute imposes, or can be read to impose, a duty on the administrator to act judicially, the courts will impose fairness discipline upon him, insisting on some observance of some principles of natural justice. Courts have operationalized this duty to act judicially in diverse ways. First, they have asked : Is there a lis inter partes? If there can be such a determination, the action would be regarded as quasi-judicial and some fairness obligations will attach to administrative decisionmaking.[^83] Of course, whether the lis exists is a matter for the courts to determine. Second, courts have moved away from the nature of decisional situation (that is, lis) to the consequences of decision for the affected parties. If there ensues punishment, stigma or evil consequence, they will insist on some fairness in arriving at decisions.[^84] Third, some judicial decisions tend to suggest that if an administrative decision has “civil consequences” (e.g. violation of personal rights or civil liberties or material deprivations or non-pecuniary damages) then certain fairness discipline would also be imposed, regardless of the question whether the action can, in hard doctrinal terms, be called “administrative” of “quasi-judicial”.[^85] Fourth, the view that discretionary action cannot attract the components of “duty to act judicially”, and therefore any obligations of fairness, although initially accepted by the Supreme Court, is now waning.[^86] Fairness discipline extends even to such powers, even though strictly they might be called administrative and discretionary.[^87] This last tendency is reinforced in recent judicial decisions.[^88]

Important questions attend this extension of fairness discipline. What are the requirements of fairness for an action, which on available criteria, cannot easily be subsumed under the rubric “quasi-judicial”? Must all, and any type, of “administrative” action attract the requirements of fairness discipline? Are these requirements the same as those which attach to what are called “quasi-judicial’ proceedings?

Tolerably clear answers are emerging in Indian decisional law to these questions. Although it has been said that the line between “administrative” and “quasi-judicial” functions is a thin one and on its way to obliteration,[^89] courts still hold that certain functions are administrative.

When certain actions are so labelled, it still remains possible to argue that fairness obligations do not at all attach.[^90] But this rather general approach is qualified from time to time by specific impositions of fairness obligations on administration manifestingly acting in a non-judicial role. For example, selection of candidates for public service is admittedly an administrative function but the presence of a candidate on the selection board (despite his non-participation in consideration of his application) has been held to attract the charge of bias.[^91] Similarly, courts have held that some of the decisional moments in administrative process may be characterized as administrative and others as involving quasi-judicial functions. Thus the self-same decisional process may differentially attract the onus of fairness obligations.[^92] To add one more example, although many statutes require consultation with affected interests, the obligation of hearing entailed is often regarded as consisting of non-stringent and “nonjudicial” hearing. In a major decision the Supreme Court has held that a decision to raise the allowances of the workmen, which had the tendency to disturb the industrial settlement, required some kind of consultations with affected interests, although the action was administrative.[^93]


[^78]: E.g., S.N. Jain, Administrative Tribunals: Existing and Proposed, Indian Law Institute, 1947,

[^79]: On validity of ouster clauses, see the classic formulation by Hidays tullah, J. in Dhulabhai V. Madhya Pradesh, AIR. 1969 S.C. 78: also sa Government of Madras y. Bassappa, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 1873.

[^80]: See M.C.J. Kagzi, The June Emergency and Constitutional Amendment, 1976, Metropolitan; Dhavan, The Amendment: Conspiracy or Revolution? Wheeler, 1978; B.K. Gupta, “Administrative Tribunals and Judicial Review …” in Indian Constitution: Trends and Issues, supra, footnote 60, p. 400,

[^81]: See Jain and Jain, pp. 167-71.

[^82]: See Jain and Jain, pp. 106-10: Sathe, pp. 36-50.

[^83]: The locus classicus here is Board of High School Education v. Ghanshyam, A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 1767, which stresses the serious “stigma” of the decision to cancel the examinations of some students for using unfair means. of course, the court adopted the view that the function of the Unfair Means Committee was quasi-judicial; but there was an interesting divergence of judicial opinion in the High Court on the issue. One judge held that the function was administrative, yet audi alteram partem applied; another classified the function as administrative liberating it from any constraints of natural justice: the third judge felt that there was room to classify the action as quasi-judicial but even if it were to be called administrative, certain rules of natural justice must apply.

[^84]: Civil rights include also right to an office, to emoluments, fixation of seniority in service, impounding of passports etc. See analysis of relevant case law in S. Gopakumaran Nair, “New Horizons of Natural Justice”, (1978) 2 The Academy Law Review, 253,

[^85]: Province of Bombay y. Khusaldas Advani, A.I.R. 1950 S.C. 222: for a critique see Fazal, who calls it “the surprizing decision”, at pp. 212-13. In Gullapalli Nageshwar Rao v. Andhra Pradesh Road Transport Corporations, AIR. 1959 S.C. 308, the function was held quasi-judicial, despite the discretionary element which was pre-eminent.

[^86]: See Jain and Jain, pp. 112-17 and case law there discussed.

[^87]: See the landmark decision in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, A.I.R. 1978 S.C. 597 per Bhagwati, J. and the fascinating exegesis by Krishna Iyer, J. in Mohinder Singh Gill v. Chief Election Commissioner, AIR. 1978 S C.851.

[^88]: Kraipak v. Union of India. A.I.R. 1970 S.C. 2042.

[^89]: See e.g. Jayantlal Amritlal v. E.N. Rana, A.I.R 1964 S.C. 648.

[^90]: See supra footnote 89. This seminal decision can of course be read so as to rest on the ground of miscarriage of justice or denial of equality of opportunity, a fundamental right under Article 16: see article by Naircited supra footnote 84.

[^91]: Jain and Jain, p. 106.

[^92]: State of Assam v. Bharat Kala Bhandar, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 1768.

[^93]: Fazal, p. 213.
