# BIAS

Indian courts have generally followed the classification of bias situations, as violative of nomo judex rule, into three categories: personal, pecuniary and official or departmental. The test formulated in respect  all the three types for proof of bias is the test of “reasonable likelihood” of a biased exercise of decision-making power or discretion. This formulation demands a substantial demonstration of the possibility of bias.[^111] There are, however, instances when the Supreme Court has considered even “suspicion about bias” as discharging the burden of proof for allegation of personal bias.[^112] One situation in which suspicion of bias was accepted as a ground for invalidating proceedings involved the question of professional standards in the practice of law. A person who had alleged professional misconduct against an advocate was once a client of the Chairman of the enquiry committee. (The Chairman was a senior lawyer himself and had held the position of the Advocate-General of the State). The Supreme Court was clear that the Chairman had no personal contact with the complainant and that there was no reasonable likelihood of a biased decision favouring complainant because of the previous professional association. And yet it held that the Chairman was disqualified not because he was likely to be biased but because justice must not only be done but “seem to be done to the litigating public”.[^113] The “suspicion of bias” test rests on an inference of apprehension of unfairness in the mind of the affected individual; and in that sense it is individual or victim-oriented as against the “reasonable likelihood test” of bias which is authority or institution-oriented. The latter, however, appears to be the dominant test.

But while questions concerning the nature of tests to be applied in determining personal or pecuniary bias are basically related to the personality of the decision-makers and their relation with other people having possibilities of influencing the instant decision), it is the doctrine of official bias which is structurally the more significant. A large number of decisions in the context of planned development have to be taken by the executive acting under discretionary and delegated powers. The executive authorities have naturally an interest, and their role obligations might even dictate vigorous pursuit in following certain policies of planned development. In other words, they may be biased in favour of certain policies but the kind of predisposition may appear to an affected individual as unfair. Advance determination of detailed policies may in reality mean, and often does, prior determination of outcomes for affected individuals. To invalidate outcomes on the solo basis of official predispositions, and even commitment to certain policy, would be to place demands of individuation beyond the bounds of bureaucratic policy-making. But to refuse to monitor outcomes at all on the ground of official bias would not mean merely denial of relief to affected people but also, in the long run, result in sapping their legal initiative to challenge what appear to them to be excesses of power and authority and thus also in the long run to dry up a source of judicial power over the administration. All these considerations have surfaced in some of the leading Indian decisions; their importance lies in terms of a “balancing” of all the foregoing factors. The resultant posture of judicial action naturally remains somewhat indeterminate. We take one example.

Many road transport nationalization statutes confer power on the Secretaries and Ministers concerned with the subject to approve schemes of nationalization prepared by the statutory transport authorities, under statutes which provide for one or the other mix of requirements of natural justice. When disputes arise between operators under the threat of nationalization and the State, the Supreme Court has clearly held that proceedings to determine the dispute as quasi-judicial.[^114] This characterization immediately brings determinations under judicial review on the ground, inter alia, of bias. The court has invalidated the determination by the Secretary of transport department who heard the transport operators’ objections to nationalization on the ground of bias.[^115] But when instead of the transport Secretary, the Minister in charge of transport himself heard the objections, the court held that allegations of official bias against the Secretary, upheld by it as valid, cannot be extended to a Minister who was the head of the department.[^116] The Minister was held not so closely identified with the departmental policies as the Secretary of a department. But the court was to later qualify this posture. It clarified that the doctrine of bias is qualified by the extent of statutory authorization. In other words:

The Minister or the officer of the Government who is invested with the power to hear objections to the scheme is acting in his official capacity and, unless there is reliable evidence to show that he is biased, his decision will not be called in question, merely because he is a limb of the Government.[^117]

The “reliable evidence” of official bias is hard to adduce. If the Minister makes public speeches affecting the course of road transport nationalization policy, can he thereafter sit in judgement over the objections of affected operators? The Supreme Court appears to have left open the possibility that if the Ministerial speeches indicate final and irrevocable policies which, in concrete terms affect certain individuals, then his hearing of objections would not be any more than a formality; such a situation may invite valid allegations of official bias. But this possibility does not operate as a thin end of a wedge. The very cases which left open this possibility also demonstrated that reliable evidence of such a final and irrevocable decision would be hard to come by: in the instant case it was easy for the court to say that clippings from a newspaper of what the Minister said cannot be held to be reliable evidence for what was attributed to him in the reports may be inaccurate. Parties alleging official bias in such cases have to establish the journalistic competence of news reporters. Only a situation when the officially released full texts of Ministerial speeches become available can some evidence be found; but even this has to be reliable in the sense that it shows to the satisfaction of courts that a final and irrevocable decision affecting the parties was contained in such texts. Public utterances do not predetermine concrete issues in law, even though they may have the tendency in fact to do precisely that.[^118] Similarly, if a Minister is to hear objections but chairs a meeting prior to hearing objections which takes the decision to nationalize the very routes on which objections are to be shortly heard, this does not disqualify the Minister from adjudicating the dispute under the statute. This is because departmental decisions must be read as subject to the provision of the statute. When these latter require hearing of objections, no prior decision can be said to have become final and irrevocable.[^119]

Thus, given the overall judicial posture, the doctrine of official bias is not an important strategy for securing administrative accountability through the exercise of judicial power. The “balancing” of interests in this area may be more aptly described as a process of accommodation and legitimation of the rather substantial executive powers in the hands of the administration. The judicial insistence on accountability then shifts to other aspects of natural justice requirements, including the audi alteram partem rule, an aspect which we have earlier examined.


[^111]: Manak Lal v. Prem Chand, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 427. See also observations of Justice Beg in Maneka Gandhi, op. cit., supra, footnote 87 where he maintains that the petitioner has to be protected not just against the violation of her rights but even “appearance of such prejudice or bias” in her mind concerning the integrity of the decision-process. See U. Baxi, op. cit., supra, footnote 98.

[^112]: See footnotes 115, 116, 117, infra, and the related text.

[^113]: Gullapalli Nageswar Rao v. A.P. Road Transport Corporation, A.I.R. 1959 S.C. 308.

[^114]: Gullapalli Nageswar Rao v. A.P. State Road Transport Corporation (commonly called Gullapalli II), A.I.R. 1959 S.C. 1376. See also Deshpande, «The One who Decides must Hear”, 1959-60 J.I.L.I. 423.

[^115]: Kondala Rao V. A.P. State Transport Corporation, A.I.R. 1961 S.C. 90.

[^116]: See e.g. Nageswara Rao v. State of Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1969 S.C. 1376, pp. 1381-83

[^117]: See supra, footnote 116 (emphasis added).

[^118]: Kagzi, pp. 377-89.

[^119]: India v. Ralli Ram, A.I.R. 1963 S.C. 1685; Chatrabhuj v. Maheswar, A.I.R. 1954 S.C.; Bhikharaj Jaipuria v. India, A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 1113.
