# CONTRACT ADMINISTRATIF

The Indian State continues to be a significant economic entrepreneur engaged in a vast variety of transactions with individual and groups. The Indian Constitution envisaged an increasing role for the State's economic and trading activities and has provided specifically, in Article 299, for government contracts. Government contracts must be expressed in the name of the President of India or Governors of States. All contracts and assurances of property" are to be executed on behalf of these heads of State, who have to authorize the manner of their execution. Personal liability for governmental contracts for the heads of State, or for any official of the State, is explicitly foreclosed.

The judiciary has taken the view that Article 299 is an important provision, safeguarding the functioning of the State as an economic agent from undue liability. Judges have, therefore, tended to approach the requirements of the article somewhat strictly. There are decisions holding that if the contract is not in writing or is not expressed on behalf of the head of State or is not in accordance with the procedure and form prescribed under Article 299, no legal action against the government may lie.[^120] Such contracts may be unenforceable even through commercial arbitration.[^121] The judiciary has taken rather strict view of the term "executed"; it is doubtful, as a matter of law, whether Indian courts would accept the plea that correspondence between the government agency and an individual or a firm gives rise to an enforceable contract in terms of Article 299.[^122] Undoubtedly, in many instances this kind of judicial approach savours of accommodation between the executive and the judiciary at the expenses of justice to the affected individual.

But the judiciary has not altogether denied relief to parties in such situations. It has been held that if the government derives any benefit out of an agreement, violative of Article 299, it is liable to compensate the party under the Indian Contract Act. Under Section 70 of that Act a kind of "quasi-contractual" liability for restitution would arise in these circumstances.[^123] In enforcing section 70 as binding as much on the State as it is on individuals, courts have thus insisted that the law of the land binds everyone, including the government as an aspect of the rule of law notion in action. Doctrinally, however, they have taken the view that Section 70, in its application to government contracts, does not embody any notion of implied contracts (not permissible under Article 299). Rather, it is based on the equitable notion of restitution; extension of this notion is then easily justified as even the officers of government may find it necessary or expedient to enter into transactions in forms not valid under Article 299. In this sense, courts assist the administration in securing internal accountability within the bureaucracy; they also attempt to restore the status quo _ante_, as far as possible for the affected parties through restitutory devices.

The other equitable gateway out of the rigours of Article 299, as judicially construed, is doctrine of promissory estoppel which emerged in India as early as 1880,[^124] and which has been applied rather well by the Supreme Court of India. Generally speaking, the courts have held that an assurance held out by a government agency, which is not against a statute on the basis of which a party has altered its position is binding against the government. They have so held on the grounds of equity and more importantly those arising from the rule of law values.[^125] All that the petitioner should prove is that he had "altered" his position as a result of the assurance; "alteration" may not be accompanied by any damage or detriment. As the Supreme Court has recently formulated the test: "The detriment in such a case is not some prejudice suffered by the promisee by acting on the promise but the prejudice that would be caused to the promisee."[^126] The plea of "executive necessity" to resile from the promise is available to the government against the plea of estoppel; but it is clear that such necessity will have to be shown as overwhelming other countervailing public interests raised by the plea of estoppel.[^127] Once again we find the Indian judiciary boldly shaping out a relief from the rigours of Article 299 on the basis of equity, rejecting the argument that all that is involved in an estoppel situation are contracts prohibited by Article 299.

The third mechanism to escape the rigours of law is the depcage of the contractual process between government agencies and citizens and companies. Once the contract is executed their relation is governed by the terms of contract and[^12]or statute if it is a statutory contract. But courts have held that the process of entering into a contract is the executive action of the State and the requirements of fairness attach to each of the stages of contract formation, in view of the guaranteed right to equality before the law and of the fundamental values of the rule of law (now also comprising the basic structure). This means, for example, that the government may not, without affording an opportunity of hearing, blacklist any trader or contractor for the purposes of government contracts: that any kind of discrimination at the threshold is prohibited by the Constitution.[^128] In a recent case, the Supreme Court has extended the fairness obligation also to statutory corporations, considering these as "State" under Article 12 of the Constitution.[^129]

In all these three respects, the Indian judiciary has made very worthwhile contributions to administrative jurisprudence. The same may be said, despite the way ward pattern of judicial responses, concerning the problem of tortious liability of the government, an aspect to which we now turn.


[^120]: India v. Ralli Ram, A.LR. 1963 S.C. 1685.

[^121]: Jain and Jain, pp. 485--88; Kagzi, 377--89; Sathe, 277--84: _see also_ V. Ramasheshan, "State Contracts in Indian Law", (1964) 13 Indian Year Book of International Affairs 275.

[^122]: _See_ e.g., State of West Bengal v. Mandal, A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 779; New Marine Coal Co. v India, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 152; Mulam Chand v. State of M.P., A.I.R. 1968 M.P. 152.

[^123]: Ganges Manufacturing Co. v. Sourujmull, (1880) ILR 5 Cal. 669: 5 CLR 533. This fact was proudly noted recently by the Supreme Court in the case cited in footnote 125, _infra._

[^124]: _See_ the notable decision in Union of India v. Indo Afghan Agencies, A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 718; _also see_ Collector of Bombay v. Municipal Corporation of City of Bombay, A.I.R. 1951 S.C. 469; Century Spinning and Manufacturing Co. Ltd. v. Ulhasnagar Municipal Council, A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 1821.

[^125]: Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills v. State of U.P., (1979) 2 S.C.C. 409, 451.

[^126]: _Ibid._, pp. 442--43; _see also_ N.N. Nair, "The Doctrine of Promissory Etsoppel in Indian Public Law", (1977) 1 Academy _cf._ Rev. 118.

[^127]: _See_ V. Punnen Thomas V. State of Kerala, A.I.R. 1969 Ker. 81, 86. _Also see_ generally Radhakrishna Agarwal v. State of Bihar, A.LR. 1977 S.C. 1496; E.E. and Co. Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, A.LR. 1975 S.C. 266.

[^128]: Setty v. International Airport Authority, Bombay, judgement delivered on May 4, 1979.

[^129]: P & O Steam Navigation Co. v. Secretary of State, 5 Bom. H.CR. App. 1.
