\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## BOMBAY {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
On the quay, awaiting the disembarkment of their relatives on board our
ship, stand four or five Parsi ladies --- all ugly, as only members of
that exclusive, inbred race can be ugly. They wear Indian *saris*, with
European blouses, stockings, and high-heeled canvas shoes. In one hand
they hold black umbrellas, in the other garlands of flowers. The black
umbrellas are for use against the sun; the wreaths of tuberoses and
oleanders are to hang round the necks of their returning friends. One of
the ladies, we are confidentially informed, is an eminent woman doctor.

A dozen _coolies_, thin-limbed like spider-monkeys, are drafted to wheel
up the gangway. They lay their hands on it, they simultaneously utter a
loud cry --- in the hope, evidently, that the gangway will take fright and
move of its own accord. But their faith is insufficient; the gangway
does not stir. Sadly, with sighs, they make up their mind to shove. A
vulgar, commonplace, and tiring method of making things move. But at
least it works. The gangway rolls across the quay, is hoisted into
position. Passengers begin to leave the ship. The friends and relations
of the Parsi ladies at last come down the plank. They are embraced,
lassoed with flowers, and led off to the attendant Hupmobiles and
Overlands behind the Custom House. It is our first view of the East.

The brown skins, the bare feet, the nose-rings, the humped
bullocks --- all these things were foreseeable, seemed obvious and
familiar from the moment of landing. The really odd, unexpected thing
about Bombay was its birds. There are more birds in the streets of this
million-peopled city than in an English woodland. Huge kites, their
wings spread and unmoving, go soaring along the thoroughfares,
effortlessly keeping pace with the traffic below. Innumerable
grey-headed crows fly hither and thither, sit perched on every roof,
every sill and wire. Their cawing is the fundamental bass to every other
sound in Bombay, Kites and crows do useful scavenging work, and Bombay,
which produces much garbage and few dustmen, keeps them well employed
and copiously fed. Nobody, in this land where the killing of animals is
all but murder, does them or their nests any harm. They increase and
multiply, they are astonishingly unafraid. All over India we were to
find the same abundance of bird life, the same trustful absence of fear.
Coming from Italy, where, for nine months of the year, while *lo sport*
is in progress, the countryside is almost birdless, where armed men lie
ambushed half a day for a hedge-sparrow, and migrant warblers are netted
and eaten by the thousand --- coming from Italy, I was particularly
impressed by the number and variety of Indian birds.

***

Architecturally, Bombay is one of the most appalling cities of either
hemisphere. It had the misfortune to develop during what was, perhaps,
the darkest period of all architectural history. Most of its public
buildings were designed and executed between 1860 and 1900. It is hardly
necessary for me to expatiate, or comment. All that need be said has
been said perfectly in the guide-book; then, let the guide-book speak.
The Presidential Secretariat, we are told, is in "the Venetian Gothic
style." The University Hall (completed 1874), which is "in the French
Decorated style of the fifteenth century," rubs shoulders with the
"Early English" Law Courts (opened in 1879). The University Library,
harking back to an earlier century than the Hall, is "in the style of
fourteenth century Gothic." The Old General Post Office "was designed in
the mediæval style by Mr. Trubshawe." (Mr. Trubshawe was cautiously
unspecific.) The Telegraph Office (date not mentioned, but my knowledge
of architectural fashions makes me inclined to a rather later epoch) is
"Romanesque." The Victoria Station, of which the style is "Italian
Gothic with certain oriental modifications in the domes," confronts the
Municipal Buildings, in which "the oriental feeling introduced into the
Gothic architecture has a pleasing effect." More frankly oriental are
the Gateway of India ("based on the work of the sixteenth century in
Gujarat'') and the Prince of Wales Museum ("based on the Indian work of
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries in the Presidency.") The
architecture of the Hotel Majestic and the Taj Mahal Hotel is not
described in the guide-book. It is a remissness ; they deserve
description. The Majestic is more wildly Mohammedan than anything that
the most orthodox of Great Moguls ever dreamed of, and the gigantic Taj
combines the style of the South Kensington Natural History Museum with
that of an Indian pavilion at an International Exhibition. After an hour
passed among these treasures of modern architecture, I took a cab, and
in mere self-defence drove to the Town Hall, which is a quiet, late
Georgian affair, built in the 'thirties. Long and low, with its flight
of steps, its central pediment, its Doric colonnade, it has an air of
calm and quiet decency. Among so many architectural cads and pretentious
bounders, it is almost the only gentleman. In Bombay, it seems as good
as the Parthenon.

***

In the lounge of the hotel is a bookstall, stocked with periodicals and
novels --- my own, I was gratified to see, among them. One whole section
of the bookstall is devoted to the sale of English and American
technical journals --- but technical journals of a single, rather special
kind. Journals of gynæcology, of obstetrics, of sexual psychology, of
venereal disease. Rows of them, and dozens of copies of each. The hotel
lounge is not specially frequented by doctors; it is the general public
which buys these journals. Strange, strange phenomenon! Perhaps it is
one of the effects of the climate.

***

From its island body, Bombay radiates long tentacles of suburban squalor
into the land. Mills and huge grey tenements, low huts among the
palm-trees flank the outgoing roads for miles, and the roads themselves
are thronged with the coming and going of innumerable passengers.
Driving out of Bombay along one of these populous highways, I felt (but
more acutely) that amazement which often overwhelms me when I pass
through the sordid fringes of some European city --- amazement at my own
safety and comfort, at the security of my privileges, at the unthinking
and almost unresentful acceptance by millions of my less fortunate
fellow-beings of my claim to be educated, leisured, comparatively
wealthy. That I and my privileged fellows should be tolerated by our own
people seems to me strange enough. But that our pretensions, which are
still higher in India than in Europe, should be allowed by these
innumerable dark-skinned strangers, over whom we rule, strikes me as
being still more extraordinary.

We are accepted much as paper money is accepted, because there is a
general belief that we are worth something. Our value is not intrinsic,
but borrowed from the opinion of the world. We live and rule on credit
and are respected, not so much because we are really formidable (though
our power is great) as because there exists a convention that we should
be respected. The less fortunate majority is carefully educated in this
useful opinion.

Our paper currency has begun to lose its conventional value in Europe.
We still continue to offer ourselves (often with a certain secret
diffidence) as five-pound notes; but the more sceptical of our
"inferiors" refuse to regard us as anything more precious than waste
paper. When the same thing begins to happen in India, when the credit on
which the white man has been living and ruling for so long is withdrawn,
what then? Without any violence, merely by quietly refusing to accept
the white man at his own valuation, merely by declining to have anything
to do with him, the Indian can reduce British rule to impotence.
Non-co-operation has failed, up till now, owing to inefficiency of
organisation and a lack of public spirit on the part of the Indians. But
efficient organisation and public spirit are the products of a special
education. When the masses have received that education, when the paper
money of European prestige has been systematically discredited and
individual Europeans are boycotted and left suspended in a kind of
social and economic vacuum, the Indians will be able to get whatever
they ask for. (The mere disappearance of all Indian servants would be
almost enough in itself to bring the white man to terms. Faced with the
prospect of having to empty his own slops, a Viceroy would begin to
listen with an increased sympathy to _Swarajist_ demands.) Whether the
Indians will succeed any better than the English in the task of
governing India, is another question. _Swaraj_ may prove a blessing, or it
may turn out to be a catastrophe. But in any case it will be obtained
whenever a sufficient number of India's three hundred and twenty
millions make up their minds systematically to ask for it; the thing is
obvious. They have only to be incredulous of the white man's
pretensions, they have only to ignore his almost invisible presence
among their multitudes; that is all.

In the meantime, however, our credit holds, at any rate among the
masses. The educated Indian may doubt whether our five-pound notes are
worth more than an equal area snipped out of the *Daily Mail*; but his
uneducated brother still accepts us at our face value. Thin-legged
pedestrians salute me as I pass. Through the squalor of suburban Bombay,
I carry my privileges of comfort, culture, and wealth in perfect safety.
They are still secure, more or less, even in the suburbs of an English
manufacturing town. For how long? Rolling along between the palm-trees,
I wonder.

***

It has been our good fortune, while in Bombay, to meet Mrs. Sarojini
Naidu, the newly-elected President of the _All-India Congress_ and a woman
who combines in the most remarkable way great intellectual power with
charm, sweetness with courageous energy, a wide culture with
originality, and earnestness with humour. If all Indian politicians are
like Mrs. Naidu, then the country is fortunate indeed.

At a tea-party in her rooms, a young Mohammedan of Arab descent recited
some verses in Urdu by the modern Panjabi poet Iqbal. The subject was
Sicily (and "Sicily," alas, was the only word in the poem which I could
understand). The poet, we were told, had been inspired to write while
passing through the Straits of Messina on his return from a European
voyage, and his poem was in the nature of a lament --- a Mohammedan's
indignant lament that the island which had once belonged to the
Musulmans should now be in the hands of infidels. I did not say so at
the time, but I must confess that the idea of Sicily as a Mohammedan
country cruelly ravished from its rightful owners, the Arabs, struck me
as rather shocking. For us good Europeans, Sicily is Greek, is Latin, is
Christian, is Italian. The Arab occupation is an interlude, an
irrelevance. True, the Arabs in Sicily were the best sort of civilised
Arabs. But it is hard for us to regard them as anything but trespassers
on that classical ground. And now I was being expected to look upon
Theocritus's island --- just as Italians before the war looked on the
Trentino and other fragments of *Italia irredenta* --- as a piece of
"unredeemed Araby." It was asking too much. For the first moment, I felt
quite indignant --- just as indignant, no doubt, as the poet had felt at
the sight of those once Mohammedan shores now polluted by Christians. In
the traveller's life these little lessons in the theory of relativity
are daily events.

The words of the poem were incomprehensible to me. But at least I was
able to appreciate the way in which it was recited, or rather
chanted --- for the stanzas were set to a regularly recurrent melody in
the minor key. Each verse began with a stirring phrase that rose, like
the call of a trumpet, from the dominant to the tonic, and, at the next
strong beat, to the minor third. After that, the melody mournfully
wandered; there were suspended notes and long shakes on a single vowel.
It was thus, I felt sure, as I listened, it was thus that the Greek
choruses must have been recited --- to a chant kept well within the limits
of a single octave, a chant (to our ears, at least) somewhat monotonous,
sung without strain, more in a speaking voice than in what we should
regard as a singing voice. And in the suspended notes, in the shakes and
warblings over a single long-drawn syllable, I seemed to recognise that
distinguishing feature of the Euripidean chorus which Aristophanes
derides and parodies in the *Frogs*.

***

This evening a congratulatory address was presented to Mr. Patel, the
new Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, by the members of his
community, an agricultural sub-caste of Gujarat. Other members of the
community have broken through the traditionary trammels --- the hall was
full of men who had left the ancestral plough for work in the city --- but
none has previously risen to a position so exalted as that attained by
Mr. Patel. "From Ploughboy to President" --- Indian journalists, like
their colleagues across the sea, have a weakness for phrases --- was the
phrase in which the newspapers summed up Mr. Patel's career.

We accompanied Mrs. Naidu to the function and, as her guests, found
ourselves sitting in places of honour on the platform. The hall was
crowded. The heat, though the sun had set, was prodigious. (It is one of
the peculiarities of the Bombay climate that the temperature rises, or
at any rate seems to rise, during the first hours of the night.) In the
garden outside, a band was playing the fox-trots of two or three seasons
ago.

The programme of the function had been carefully worked out. A chorus of
children was to sing during the period of waiting before Mr. Patel
entered. Somebody was to recite a congratulatory poem when he had taken
his seat. Then there were to be speeches, with Mr. Patel's reply and the
presentation of the address in its silver casket to finish off the
proceedings. A perfect programme, on paper; but in practice, as it
turned out, not quite so good as it might have been. For the band played
and the audience talked all through the children's singing; indeed, it
was only quite by chance, because I happened to notice that they were
opening and shutting their mouths in an unnatural, fish-like sort of
way, that I came to know that the children were singing at all. And when
the reciter began intoning his congratulatory poem, the indefatigable
band struck up the tune of "Why did you kiss that Girl?" --- the poem was
lost. But by this time some few thousands of Bombay's innumerable
population of crows had settled in the trees outside the hall and were
discussing the question, as gregarious birds will do at sunset, of
retiring for the night. Their cawing was portentous. Never in Europe
have I heard anything like it. I was sitting on the platform, within a
few feet of the speakers; but their voices were quite inaudible, even to
me. It was only some half an hour later, when the crows had dropped off
to sleep, that any word can have reached the audience. After that the
proceedings went off pretty smoothly, and with only a little hitch or
two about the reading of the address and the presentation of the casket
to mar the solemnity of the occasion.

I was reminded very much of analogous functions in Italy. There is no
word of which Italian journalists are fonder than the word *solenne*.
Every ceremony of which you read an account in an Italian newspaper is
solemn --- solemn foundation-stone layings, solemn depositings of wreaths
on tombs, solemn celebrations of centenaries, solemn royal entrances and
exits. In the papers, as I say, all these things are solemn. In
practice, however, they are rarely anything but slipshod, haphazard, and
to northern eyes at any rate, ineffective and unimpressive. The good
Catholic who comes to Rome in the hope of seeing noble and soul-stirring
religious ceremonies, generally returns disappointed to his own country.
The fact is that they order these things better in France, in England,
in Belgium, in Germany --- in any northern land. We Northerners
stage-manage our effects more professionally than do the people of the
south. We take pains to impress ourselves; and at the same time we give
the ceremony which we have staged every chance of seeming impressive to
us by deliberately throwing ourselves into a serious state of mind and
consistently keeping our seriousness till the function is over. The
Southerner declines to take trouble over the details of
stage-management, and will not be bothered to hold one mental attitude
for a long time at a stretch. To us, in consequence, he seems
disgracefully slipshod, cynical, and irreverent.

But we must not be over-hasty in our judgments. The Southerner has his
own traditions about these matters, and they happen to be different from
ours. In this respect, I should guess, his habits of thought and feeling
are nearer to the Oriental's than to ours. Let us try to understand
before we condemn.

We call the Southerner slipshod because he tolerates shabbiness among
his grandeurs, and permits his solemnities to be marred by a ludicrous
inefficiency. But he could retort by calling us crassly unimaginative
because we are incapable of seeing the fine intention through the
inadequate medium of its expression, of appreciating the noble general
effect in spite of the shabbiness of the details. For in matters of art,
he would argue (and a religious ceremony, a civic or political function
are forms of art, being only solemn ballets and symbolical charades), it
is the intention and the general effect that count. Those little struts
and flying buttresses of marble, with which the Greeks strengthened
their statues, are absurd, if you choose to consider them closely. But
they are meant to be ignored. Structurally, a sham façade is ludicrous;
the Southerner knows it, of course, just as well as Mr. Ruskin. But,
more wise than Ruskin, he does not fly into a passion of moral
indignation over the falsehood of it; he permits himself to enjoy the
genuine grandiosity of its appearance when seen from the right angle. In
church, the priest may gabble, as though he were trying to break a
world's record, the acolytes may pick their noses, the choir-boys sing
out of tune, the vergers spit; we Northerners are revolted, but the
wisely indulgent Southerner passes over these trivial details, and
enjoys the fine general effect of the ecclesiastical ballet in spite of
its little blemishes. But if he enjoys it, the Northerner now asks, why
doesn't he at least sit still and refrain from laughing chatter, why
doesn't he try to look, and looking, make himself feel, consistently
serious? To which the other will retort by deriding the Northerner's
slowness and inelasticity of mind, his pomposity, his incapacity for
frankly feeling two emotions at once, or at any rate in very rapid
succession. "I can see ludicrous and shabby details just as clearly as
you do," he will say, "and, like you, I deplore them. But I keep my
sense of proportion, and do not permit mere details to interfere with my
appreciation of the general effect. You have a talent for high
seriousness; but I can smile and feel solemn within the same minute. In
church I pray fervently at one moment, I am transported by the beauty of
the ceremonial (in spite of the shoddy details), and the next I make
eyes at the young woman across the aisle or talk to my neighbour about
the price of rubber shares. Operatic airs, I know, are stagey and
conventional, and I deride the ludicrously strutting tenor who sings
them; but at the same time I rapturously applaud his bawling and abandon
myself, even while I mock, to the throaty passion of the music. Your
mind is clumsier, more stiffly starched than mine. You can only be one
thing at a time, and you regard as shocking the nimble emotional antics
of those more fortunately endowed than yourself or more reasonably
brought up. For my part I can only pity you for your limitations."

The speeches, all but that of Mrs. Naidu, who gave us English eloquence,
were in Gujarati, and for me, therefore, no better than gibberish. I
amused myself by listening for the occasional English words with which
the incomprehensibility was powdered. "Gibber gibber gibber Bombay
Presidency"; it was thus that I should have reported a typical speech of
the evening. "Gibber gibber committee, gibber gibber gibber minority
report, gibber gibber Government of India, gibber gibber gibber George
Washington, gibber Edmund Burke, gibber gibber gibber Currency
Commission, gibber gibber gibber gibber ..." It was thus, I reflected,
that our Saxon fathers borrowed from the invaders' speech the words for
which they could find no equivalent in their own debased, post-Conquest
English. Listening to the incomprehensible chatter of his foreign
vassals, the Norman baron would have been amused to catch, every now and
then, the sound of such familiar words as "army," "castle," "law."

The function came to an end. Festooned with flowers --- for there had been
a generous distribution of garlands, by which even we, albeit quite
undeserving, had profited --- we followed our hostess into the garden.
There under palm-trees, we drank a kind of richly perfumed soda-water,
we ate strange dumplings stuffed with mincemeat that was at once sweet
and violently peppery --- chopped mutton mixed with a vitriolic jam --- and
tried to take the burning taste of them away with little cakes and
sandwiches, slabs of almond icing and fried savouries. At the other side
of the garden, safely removed from possible contamination, the orthodox
refreshed themselves with special foods prepared by cooks of guaranteed
good family. White-bearded and most majestically robed, Mr. Patel moved
among the guests, looking like a minor, even a major, prophet --- but a
prophet, as we saw when he sat down at table, with a most reassuringly
humorous twinkle in his eyes.

It was nearly nine when we got back to the hotel. Coming up from dinner,
an hour later, we found our room magically perfumed by the tuberoses and
champaks of our garlands. That night, and all next day, till they were
quite withered, the flowers poured out their scent, and the wind driven
down on us by the electric fan in the ceiling was a warm air impregnated
with strange and tropical sweetness.
:::

\clearpage
