\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## KASHMIR {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
It is cheaper in this country to have a waggon pulled by half a dozen
men than by a pair of oxen or horses. All day, on the road below our
house, the heavy-laden carts go creaking slowly along behind their team
of human draft animals. The _coolies_ sing as they pull, partly out of
sheer lightness of heart (for these Kashmiris are wonderfully cheerful,
in spite of everything), and partly, no doubt, because they have
discovered the psychological fact that to sing in chorus creates a
strengthening sense of solidarity within the singing group, and seems to
lighten the work in hand by making the muscular effort respond almost
automatically to a regular rhythmic stimulus. I noticed two main types
of labourer's chantey. One of these is melodically quite ambitious; for
it ranges over no less than three notes of the minor scale. It is sung
in unison, and there is no separate chorus leader. The commonest form of
the melody is more or less as follows:

![](assets/kashmir-music.png)

*Da capo* ad infinitum. They sing it all day at their work and half the
night as well, for fun, when there happens to be a wedding or some
similar festival. The other chantey takes the form of a kind of dialogue
between the chorus and a chorus leader, who responds to the two strong
beats of the choral song by a single monosyllable, always the same,
sustained for two beats, and sung emphatically on a lower note. The
words were incomprehensible to me; but translated into terms of
gibberish, they sounded something like this: *Chorus*, Dum-dum.
*Leader*, BONG. Chorus, Tweedle-dum. *Leader*, BONG; Tum-diddy, BONG;
Tweedle-weedle, BONG. And so on, hour after hour.

This rhythmical dialogue is the favourite music of the waggon teams.
Walking abroad, one is never for long out of hearing of that monotonous
Dum-dum, BONG; ditty-dum, BONG. The singing floats down between the
poplar trees of the straight flat roads of the valley, and slowly,
laboriously the waggon and its human crew come following after the
swift-travelling song. Passing, I feel almost ashamed to look at the
creeping wain; I avert my eyes from a spectacle so painfully accusatory.
That men should be reduced to the performance of a labour which, even
for beasts, is cruel and humiliating, is a dreadful thing. "Ah, but they
feel things less than we do," the owners of motor-cars, the eaters of
five meals a day, the absorbers of whisky hasten to assure me; "they
feel them less, because they're used to this sort of life. They don't
mind, because they know no better. They're really quite happy."

And these assertions are quite true. They do not know better; they *are*
used to this life; they are incredibly resigned. All the more shame to
the men and to the system that have reduced them to such an existence
and kept them from knowing anything better.

It is in relation to their opposites that things have significance for
us. "Opposite shows up opposite, as a Frank a negro." So wrote Jalalu
'dDin Muhammad Rumi. "The opposite of light shows what is light. ... God
created grief and pain for this purpose: to wit, to manifest happiness
by its opposites. Hidden things are manifested by their opposites; but
as God has no opposite, He remains hidden." These Kashmiri draft
_coolies_, who are unaware of comfort, culture, plenty, privacy, leisure,
security, freedom, do not in consequence know that they are slaves, do
not repine at being herded together in filthy hovels like beasts, do not
suffer from their ignorance, and are resigned to being overworked and
underfed. Those who profit by the Kashmiri's ignorant acquiescence in
such sub-human conditions are naturally not anxious that they should be
made aware of the desirable opposites which would make their present
life seem odious. The spread of education, the improvement of living
conditions are causes which do not rouse them to enthusiasm. And yet, in
spite of everything, the spirit of humanitarianism works even through
these reluctant agents. For the spirit of humanitarianism is the spirit
of the age, which it is impossible for any man, born with the usual
supply of social instinct and suggestibility, completely to ignore. His
reason may tell him that his own personal ad vantage would be best
served if he kept the disinherited in their places. But a stronger force
than reason is for ever trying to make him act against reason. To be
utterly ruthless towards the disinherited would be profitable; but he
can never bring himself to be utterly ruthless. In spite of himself, he
feels that he ought to give them justice. And he gives it --- not very
often, no doubt, and not very much at a time --- but still, he gives it;
that is the queer, significant, and *modern* thing. Even in Kashmir a
tiny pinch of this humanitarian commodity --- as yet, however, all but
invisible --- has begun to be distributed.
:::


\clearpage
