\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## SRINAGAR {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The Mogul gardens are disappointingly inferior to any of the more or
less contemporary gardens of Italy. Shalimar and Nishat Bagh cannot
compare with the Villa d'Este at Tivoli, or the Villa Lanti, near
Viterbo. The little Chashma Shahi is architecturally the most charming
of the gardens near Srinagar. And the loveliest for trees and waters is
Atchibal, at the upper end of the valley; while far-off Verinag, where
Jahangir enclosed the blue deep source of the Jhelum in an octagonal
tank surrounded by arcades, has a strange and desolate beauty all its
own. But in general it may be said that the design of all these Indian
gardens is rigid, monotonous, and lacking entirely in the Italian
grandiosity, the Italian fertility of invention. The architecture of the
pleasure houses which they contain is petty and almost rustic. The
decorative details, such of them, at any rate, as remain --- for the
ornamentation was mostly of a rather gimcrack and temporary
character --- are without much originality. How greatly the Mogul
architects were handicapped by the profession of a religion which
forbade the introduction of the human form into their decorative schemes
is manifested especially in their fountains. A fountain in one of these
gardens is just a nozzle sticking out of the ground, the end of a
hose-pipe turned vertically upwards. Miserable object, and unworthy of
the name of fountain! I shut my eyes and think of those Bolognese
mermaids with their spouting breasts; those boys and tortoises at Rome,
all black and shining with wetness; those naiads and river-gods and
gesticulating allegories among the rainbows and the falling crystals of
the Piazza Navons; those Tritons at the Villa Lanti with their prancing
sea-horses --- all the fantastic world of tutelary deities that stand
guard over Italian springs. The Moguls were good Mohammedans and content
with unadorned nozzles.

If the Kashmiri gardens are beautiful, that is the work, not so much of
man as of nature. The formal beds are full of zinnias and scarlet
cannas. The turf is fresh and green. The huge chenar trees go up into
the pale bright sky; their white trunks shine between the leaves, which
the autumn has turned to a rusty vermilion. Behind them are the steep
bare hills, crested already with snow. Their colour, where the sun
strikes them, is a kind of silvery-glaucous gold and, in the shadows, a
deep intense indigo. Below, on the other side, stretches the Dal Lake,
with the isolated fort-crowned hill of Hari-Parbat on the further shore.
The sun shines out of a flawless sky, but the air is cool against the
face. "It is a nipping and an eager air"; for we are at more than five
thousand feet above the sea. The Great Moguls regarded Kashmir as the
earthly paradise. And a paradise to one coming fresh from the earthly
hell of the Panjab in summer it must indeed have seemed. The visitor
from temperate lands finds it less paradisiacal because more familiar.
The lakes and mountains remind us of Switzerland and Italy, and in the
level valley, with its interminable poplar avenues, its waterways, and
soggy fields, we find ourselves thinking of France, of Holland even. Our
ecstasies of admiration are reserved for the unfamiliar tropics.

***

In the autumn great flocks of teal and mallard come through Kashmir, on
their way from the breeding-grounds to their winter home in Northern
India. Some breed in the recesses of Ladakh, a few hundred miles only
from the Kashmir valley; but the majority, it is said, go further afield
into Central Asia, possibly even into Siberia, where so many migrants
pass the brief but generous summer. In the autumn they fly southwards,
over the Himalayas, into India. Some varieties of these water-fowl cross
the range at the eastern end, some to the west. Thus the cotton-tail, I
am assured by sportsmen, is found in Assam and Bengal, but not in the
Panjab; while the mallard is seen only in the west. How these birds,
which normally spend their lives in the plain, contrive to pass the
Himalayas without dying of mountain sickness or asphyxiation on the way,
is something of a mystery. Most small animals, when taken up suddenly to
a height of fifteen or twenty thousand feet --- and many of the Himalayan
passes touch these heights --- simply die. The migrating duck, if it
really does come down from Central Asia, must be flying at these
altitudes for miles at a stretch. Physiologically, the feat seems almost
as extraordinary as that of the eel, which leaves its native pond or
river to breed, two or three thousand miles away, in the deep water of
the ocean.

It would be interesting to know the feelings of a migrant animal, when
the moment has arrived for it to perform its journey. The swallow at the
end of the summer, the salmon when, having attained its maximum weight,
it feels that the time has come for it to go up into the rivers, the
freshwater eel at the approach of its first and final breeding season,
must feel, I imagine, much as a man might feel when suddenly converted,
or who finds himself compelled by an irresistible sense of duty to
perform some hazardous and disagreeable enterprise. Some power within
them --- an immanent god --- commands them to change their comfortable way
of life for a new and arduous existence. There is no disobeying the
command; the god compels. If eels could formulate their theories of
ethics, they would be eloquent, I am sure, about the categorical
imperative and the compulsive character of the sense of duty.

Our categorical imperatives, like those of eels and swallows, are
generally backed by the forces of an instinct. Our social instinct
deters us from doing what we think would be condemned, and encourages us
to do what we think would be commended by our equals, by our moral
superiors, by our "better selves," by "God." But there are occasions,
curiously enough, when the categorical imperative to do or refrain from
doing seems to have no connection with a compulsive instinct. For
example, a man writes two letters, addresses two envelopes, puts the
letters into the envelopes, and seals them up. He is extremely careful
when inserting the letters, to see that each goes into its proper
envelope. Nevertheless, a few minutes later, he is seized by an
irresistible desire to reopen the envelopes so as to make sure that the
letter to his mistress is not in the envelope addressed to his maiden
aunt, and *vice versa*. He knows that each letter is where it should be.
But despite his conviction, despite the derisive comments of the
rational part of his mind, he does reopen the envelopes. The categorical
imperative is stronger than reason. It may be so strong that after five
more minutes, he will open the envelopes a second time.

What gives the imperative its strength in cases such as this, I am at a
loss to imagine. The August cuckoo takes wing for Africa at the command
of a special migratory instinct. A desire born of his social instinct,
to win the approval of his fellows, of some hypostasized "better self"
or "personal god" makes a man act honourably in circumstances where it
would be more profitable and more convenient to act dishonourably. But
when a man reopens an envelope to see if it contains the letter he
*knows* it does contain, when he gets out of bed on a cold night to make
sure that he has switched off the light and bolted the doors which he
clearly remembers turning out and bolting ten minutes before, no primary
instinct can be evoked to account for the compulsive nature of the
desire to do these irrational things. In such cases the categorical
imperative seems to be morally senseless and psychologically
unaccountable. It is as though a god were playing practical jokes.

***

The Kashmiris are proverbial throughout India for the filthiness of
their habits. Wherever a choice is offered them between cleanliness and
dirt, they will infallibly choose the latter. They have a genius for
filthiness. We had daily opportunities of observing the manifestations
of this peculiar genius. Our compound was provided with water from the
city supply. From a tap at the end of the garden we could draw the pure
filtered water of the reservoir among the mountains. The water from this
tap, which was left running for hours at a time, was collected in a
small brick-lined tank, on which the gardener drew for the watering of
his flowers. And not the gardener only. We found that our servants had
an almost irresistible desire to fetch our washing and drinking water
from the same source. The fresh water ran sparkling from the tap; but
their instinct was to take only the standing fluid in the uncovered
tank. And to what uses the tank was put! Looking out in the morning, we
could see our sweeper crouching on the brink to perform his ablutions.
First he washed his hands, then his feet, then his face; after that he
thoroughly rinsed his mouth, gargled and spat into the tank. Then he
douched his nose. And when that was finished, he scooped some water in
his hands and took a drink. A yard away was the tap. He preferred the
tastier water of the tank.

The astonishing thing is that epidemics are not more frequent and severe
than is actually the case. That they are not is due, I suppose, to the
powerful disinfectant action of the sunlight. Perhaps also an almost
daily and domestic familiarity with the germs of typhoid and cholera has
bred among Kashmiri phagocytes a healthy contempt for their attacks,
together with increased powers of resistance.

***

The Kashmiri pandit has a more than Spanish objection to manual labour.
But, unlike the hidalgo who thought himself dishonoured by the exercise
of any profession save that of arms, the pandit is ambitious of wielding
only the pen. He may be abjectly poor (most people are abjectly poor in
Kashmir); but he will do only a pandit's work. Chauffeurs may get good
wages, servants are clothed and fed; but the proud pandit had rather
walk the streets begging than accept employments so derogatory to his
Brahmin dignity.

There are many pandits in Kashmir. They are all educated, more or less,
and all equally proud. The consequence is that, in Kashmir, you can hire
a clerk for about half as much as you would have to pay your cook. And
not in Kashmir only. It is the same throughout the whole of India. A
circus recently visited Lahore. The management advertised for
gate-keepers at fifteen rupees a month. Among the applicants, I was
told, were upwards of forty graduates. Mysore, the best-governed of the
Indian States, finds the same difficulty in disposing of the finished
products of its higher education. After having gone to the trouble of
taking their degrees, the graduates of its colleges demand, almost as a
right (it is only natural), the work for which their educational
attainments fit them. But the work does not exist.

That is the farcical tragedy of Indian education. The Universities
produce a swarm of graduates, for whom there is nothing to do. The State
can employ only a limited number of them and, outside the government
service, there is almost no opening for a man with the ordinary general
education of the West. The industrial and commercial activities, to
which most of our young educated men devote themselves, hardly exist in
India. There is no available liquid capital to start such industries on
a large scale, and the average educated Indian lacks the enterprise and
energy to begin in a small way on his own. His ambition is to step into
some safe clerical job with no responsibilities, and a pension at the
end of it. A "crammed" education in the humanities or in pure science
hardly fits him for anything else. Unhappily, the number of safe
clerkships with pensions attached is strictly limited. The Indian youth
steps out of the University examination hall into a vacuum. The class of
educated unemployed --- the class most dangerous to an established
government --- steadily grows.

***

Educated Indians of the older generation have a great weakness for
apophthegms, quotations, and cracker mottoes. They punctuate their
conversation with an occasional "As the Persian poet so beautifully puts
it": then follows a string of incomprehensible syllables, with their
appended translation, which generally embodies some such gem of human
wisdom as "Honesty is the best policy," or "The higher the art, the
lower the morals," or "My uncle's house is on a hill, but I cannot eat
this rotten cabbage." Those whose education has been of a more
occidental cast have Gray's *Elegy*, the works of Sir Edwin Arnold, and
the more sententious parts of Shakespeare at their finger-tips. But
among the younger Indians the quotation habit seems to be dying out.
Their wisdom is diffuse and unquotable. Their minds are stored with the
nebulous débris of newspaper articles, pamphlets, and popular science
booklets, not with heroic couplets.

It is the same with us in the West. Latin tags issue from the mouths
only of the aged. The days when Virgil and Horace were bandied from one
side of the House of Commons to the other are past. Latin with us, like
Persian among the Indians, is a deader language than it was a century,
even a generation, ago. Even the English classics are rarely quoted now.
Young people trot out their Shakespeare less frequently than do their
elders. The reason, I suppose, is this: we read so much, that we have
lost the art of remembering. Indeed, most of what we read is nonsense,
and not meant to be remembered. The man who remembered the social
paragraphs in his morning paper would deserve to be sent to an asylum.
So it comes about that we forget even that which is not worthy of
oblivion. Moreover, to young people brought up in this queer provisional
patchwork age of ours, and saturated with its spirit, it seems absurd to
collect the rags of thought bequeathed by other and, they feel, utterly
different ages. What is the use of knowing, in 1925, that "when lovely
woman stoops to folly," the best, the only thing she can do "is to die"?
What is the good of asserting baldly that "the quality of mercy is not
strained," that "God's in His heaven, all's right with the world"? These
poetical statements have no meaning for us. When lovely woman stoops to
folly, we do not think of death; we think of suppressed complexes and
birth-control and the rights of the unmarried mother. About the quality
of mercy we have our own contemporary ideas; how we regard it depends on
whether we are followers of Gandhi on the one hand, or of Sorel, Lenin,
and Mussolini on the other. It falleth as the gentle dew from heaven; it
is twice blest. No doubt. But what is this to us, who have our peculiar
problems about the rights and wrongs of violence to decide in our own
way? And what meaning for us have those airy assertions about God? God,
we psychologists know, is a sensation in the pit of the stomach,
hypostasized; God, the personal God of Browning and the modern
theologian, is the gratuitous intellectualist interpretation of
immediate psycho-physiological experiences. The experiences are
indubitably true for those who feel them; but the interpretation of them
in terms of Browning's personal God is illogical and unjustifiable.

No, decidedly, the cracker mottoes of the ancients are of no use to us.
We need our own tags and catch-words. The preceding paragraph is full of
them: complex, birth-control, violence for an idea, psychology, and the
rest. Few of these words or of the ideas for which they stand have yet
found their way into poetry. For example, God, the intellectually
interpreted sensation in the pit of the stomach, has not yet been
crystallised into couplets. His home is still the text-book, the
*Hibbert Journal* article. Like most of the rest of our ideas He is
unquotable. The ancients were able to build up their notions of the
world at large round an elegant poetical skeleton. Less fortunate, we
have only a collection of scientific, or sham-scientific, words and
phrases to serve as the framework of our philosophy of life. Our minds
and our conversation are consequently less elegant than those of our
fathers, whose ideas had crystallised round such pleasing phrases as
"*Sunt lacrimæ rerum,*" "I could not love thee, dear, so much, loved I
not honour more," and "A sense of something far more deeply interfused."
Some day, it may be, a poet will be found to reduce our catch-words to
memorable artistic form. By that time, however, they will probably be as
meaninglessly out-of-date as the cracker mottoes of the classics.

***

Srinagar owns a large population of sacred cows and bulls that wander
vaguely through the streets, picking up such vegetable garbage, grass,
and fallen leaves as they can find. They are small beasts --- the half of
good-sized English cattle --- and marvellously mild. Red rags mean nothing
to these little bulls, they can be trusted in china shops --- even in
nurseries. Liberty, underfeeding, and unlimited access to the females of
their species account, no doubt, for this surprising gentleness.

But though harmless, these Hindu totems are passively a nuisance. They
will not attack you as you walk or drive along the streets, but neither
will they get out of your way. They stand there, meditatively
ruminating, in the middle of the road, and no shouting, no ringing of
bells or hooting of horns will send them away. Not until you are right
on top of them will they move. The fact is, of course, that they know
their own sacredness. They have learned by long experience that they can
stand in the road as much as they like and that, however furiously the
klaxon sounds, nothing will ever happen to them. Nothing; for Kashmir,
though its inhabitants are mostly Mohammedans, is ruled by a pious Hindu
dynasty. Up till a few years ago a man who killed a cow was sentenced to
death. Under a milder dispensation he now gets only a matter of seven
years' penal servitude. A salutary fear of cows is rooted in the breast
of every Kashmiri chauffeur. And the totems know it. With a majestic
impertinence they stroll along the middle of the roads. When one is a
god, one does not disturb oneself for the convenience of mere man,
however importunate.

To the eye of pure reason there is something singularly illogical about
the way in which the Hindus shrink from killing cows or eating their
flesh when dead, but have no scruples about making the life of the
sacred beasts, by their ill-treatment, a hell on earth. So strict is the
orthodoxy of Kashmir, that Bovril is confiscated at the frontier, and
sportsmen are forbidden to shoot the wild *nilgai*, which is not bovine
at all, but happens to be miscalled the "blue cow"; the very name is
sacred. And yet nothing is done to protect these god-like animals from
any cruelty that does not actually result in death. They are underfed
and, when used as draft animals, mercilessly over-driven. When the goad
fails to make them move, their driver will seize them by the tail and,
going through the motions of one who tries to start up a Ford car,
violently twist. In winter, when fodder runs short, the Kashmiris pack
their beasts together in a confined space until they begin to sweat,
then turn them out into the snow, in the hope that they will catch
pneumonia and die. To the eye of reason, I repeat it, it certainly seems
strange. But then the majority of human actions are not meant to be
looked at with the eye of reason.

***

It takes the Tartar traders six weeks of walking to get from Kashgar to
Srinagar. They start with their yaks and ponies in the early autumn,
when the passes are still free from snow and the rivers, swollen in
summer by its melting, have subsided to fordableness. They walk into
Kashmir, and from Kashmir into India. They spend the winter in India,
sell what they have brought, and in the following spring, when the
passes are once more open, go back into Turkestan with a load of Indian
and European fabrics, velvet and plush and ordinary cotton, which they
sell for fabulous profit in their own country.

We paid a visit to the Central Asian *sarai* at Srinagar where the
Tartars halt for a rest on their way down into India. A dozen merchants
with their servants were encamped there: strange Mongolian men,
high-booted, trousered, jerkined in thick cloth or sheepskin. They
showed us their wares: carpets, costly and cheap, from Kashgar and the
other oasis cities of the Tarim basin; coarse felt mats, on which were
rudely printed in red and blue the most exquisite designs; handwoven and
hand-printed cottons from Turkestan; Chinese silks, jade and crystal;
furs. We bought a rug of the poorest quality, a thing of more cotton
than wool, but superbly patterned in colours that were none the less
beautiful for being manifestly aniline. Also a felt mat in the design of
which a Greek decorative motive played a leading part. That identity of
the contemporary with the ancient and classical form --- was it due to the
coincidence of reinvention, to a modern importation from the West? Or
was it due, as I liked to think it was, to the survival, through
centuries of change and tumult and in spite of invasions and slaughters,
of the art which Alexander's adventurous successors, the despots of
Central Asia, implanted in that once flourishing land beyond the
mountains?

I do not know why it should be so; but there is something peculiarly
romantic about caravans and the slow commerce of pedestrians. The
spectacle of a hundred laden yaks or ponies is enough to fire the
imagination; of a hundred laden trucks leaves us entirely cold. We take
no interest in the merchant who sends his goods by train; but the
pedestrian merchant seems to us an almost beautiful and heroic figure.
And the aura of romance which surrounded the Tartars was brightened in
our eyes when they showed us their medium of exchange. Diving down into
the recesses of their greasy clothing, they pulled out for our
inspection glittering handfuls of gold. We examined the coins. They were
Russian ten-rouble pieces of before the Revolution, all bright and new.
The head of the Tsar stood sharply out on them, as though they had but
yesterday issued from the Imperial mint.
:::


\clearpage
