\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## TAXILA {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The country round Taxila, that ancient city where Alexander rested and
found an ally, reminded me a little of the Roman Campagna. The outworks
of the Himalayas play the part of the Alban and Sabine mountains. Ranges
of woodless Frascatis and desiccated Tivolis subside into a grey and
rolling plain. On sudden and unexpected eminences rising out of this
plain stand the Indian equivalents of Nepi and Civita Castellana. And
here and there, on hill-tops, in the open ground below, lie the ruins of
the various cities and temples which flourished and decayed, were born
anew, only to be sacked and plundered, were re-edified, only to perish
absolutely, between the year 1500 before our era and the year 500 after
Christ.

First cousins, they seem --- these ruins --- of the tombs along the Appian
Way, of Ostia and Hadrian's Villa (for ruins, whatever their date and
country, have a strong family resemblance among themselves), and own
brothers, I may add, to the inhabited villages near by, which differ
from the ruins only in being dirtier and more dilapidated.

The best preserved remains are those of the Buddhist monastery and
temple of Jaulian. The temple is a *stupa* or relic mound, and must have
looked when intact, with its dome and spire of superimposed umbrellas,
something like the modern Burmese pagoda --- which is, of course, only a
local variation of the original Indian *stupa*. Today, nothing remains,
but the base of the main *stupa* with, all round it, a number of
miniature *stupas* or votive shrines. The monastery adjoins the temple,
and resembles almost exactly the ruins of a Christian monastery. I
noticed only one point of difference: the Buddhist monks had bathrooms.

Round the base of the *stupa* and in niches in the walls of the monastic
cloisters, a quantity of sculpture in stone, stucco, and clay remains
intact and in position. The Greek influence is manifest, even in this
work of the third century A.D. The Hellenistic leaven was active for
centuries. Ages passed, and many barbarian invasions swept across the
land before all traces of the Greek influence were quite eradicated and
the art of Northern India became again entirely oriental.

The quality of the work at Taxila is not particularly high. Far finer
carving has been found at other sites in North--Western India. The best
of it is now in the Peshawar Museum, where I was specially struck by
some scenes from the life of Buddha represented in high relief on a
series of small stone panels. These things have the vigour and dramatic
force, with much of the beauty of composition characteristic of Italian
Gothic sculpture. I remember two in particular --- Buddha in the act of
renouncing his family ties and Buddha preaching from the mouth of a
cave --- that might have been by Niccolo Pisano.
:::


\clearpage
