\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## BETWEEN PESHAWAR & LAHORE {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
At Peshawar we were seized with one of our periodical financial panics.
Money, in this country, slips rapidly between the fingers, particularly
between the fingers of the tourist. Great wads of it have to be handed
out every time one gets into the train; for fares are high and distances
enormous. No place in India seems to be less than three hundred miles
from any other place; the longer journeys have to be measured in
thousands. Financial panics are justifiable. We decided to travel
second-class as far as Lahore.

For the first hour or so we were alone in our compartment. We
congratulated ourselves on having secured all the comfort and privacy of
first-class travelling at exactly half the price. In future, we decided,
we would always travel second.But nature abhors a vacuum, and our
compartment was evidently the object of her special abhorrence. When the
train stopped at Campbellpur, we were invaded. In the twinkling of an
eye our luxurious emptiness was filled to overflowing with luggage and
humanity. And what queer specimens of humanity! The leader of the party
which now entered the compartment was a middle-aged man wearing a yellow
robe and, on his head, a kind of quilted bonnet with hanging ear-flaps.
He was profusely garlanded with yellow chrysanthemums, and had been
followed on to the platform by a large crowd of flower-bearing admirers
and devotees. Our ignorance of the language did not permit us to
discover who this exalted person might be. But he was evidently some
kind of high priest, some Hindu pope of considerable holiness, to judge
by the respect which was paid him by his numerous retinue and his
admirers. His passage along the line must have been well advertised; for
at every station our compartment was invaded by a swarm of devotees who
came to kiss the great man's feet and to crave a blessing, which in most
cases he seemed too lazy to give. Even the guards and ticket-collectors
and stationmasters came in to pay their respects. The enthusiasm of one
ticket-collector was so great that he travelled about thirty miles in
our already packed compartment, simply in order to be near the holy man.
He, meanwhile, passed the time by counting his money, which was
contained in a large brass-bound box, by loudly eating and, later,
dozing. Even at the stations he did not take the trouble to rouse
himself, but reclined with closed eyes along his seat, and passively
permitted the faithful to kiss his feet. When one is as holy as he
evidently was, it is unnecessary to keep up appearances, behave
decently, or do anything for one's followers. Office and hereditary
honour claim the respect of a believing people quite as much as personal
merit.

Judging by appearances, which are often deceptive, I should say that
this particular holy man had no personal merit, but a very great office.
His face, which had the elements of a fine and powerful face, seemed to
have disintegrated and run to fat under the influence of a hoggish
self-indulgence. To look at, he was certainly one of the most repulsive
human specimens I have ever seen. But of course he may in reality have
been a saint and an ascetic, a preacher and a practiser of the moral
doctrines formulated in the Gita, or even one of those pure-souled
oriental mystics who, we are told, are to leaven the materialism of our
Western civilisation. He may have been, but I doubt it. All that we
could be certain of was that he looked unpleasant, and was undoubtedly
dirty; also that he and his admirers exhaled the sour stink of garments
long unwashed.

Tolstoy objected to too much cleanliness on the ground that to be too
clean is a badge of class. It is only the rich who can afford the time
and money to wash their bodies and shift their linen frequently. The
labourer who sweats for his living, and whose house contains no
bathroom, whose wardrobes no superfluous shirts, must stink. It is
inevitable, and it is also right and proper, that he should. Work is
prayer. Work is also stink. Therefore stink is prayer. So, more or less,
argues Tolstoy, who goes on to condemn the rich for not stinking, and
for bringing up their children to have a prejudice against all stinks
however natural and even creditable. The non-stinker's prejudice against
stink is largely a class prejudice, and therefore to be condemned.

Tolstoy is quite right, of course. We, who were brought up on open
windows, clean shirts, hot baths, and sanitary plumbing, find it hard to
tolerate twice-breathed air and all the odours which crowded humanity
naturally exhales. Our physical education has been such that the
majority of our fellow-beings, particularly those less fortunately
circumstanced than ourselves, seem to us slightly or even extremely
disgusting. A man may have strong humanitarian and democratic
principles; but if he happens to have been brought up as a bath-taking,
shirt-changing lover of fresh air, he will have to overcome certain
physical repugnances before he can bring himself to put those principles
into practice to the extent, at any rate, of associating freely with men
and women whose habits are different from his own. It is a deplorable
fact; but there it is. Tolstoy's remedy is that we should all stink
together. Other reformers desire to make it economically possible for
every man to have as many hot baths and to change his shirt as often as
do the privileged non-stinkers at the present day. Personally, I prefer
the second alternative.

Meanwhile, the crowd in our compartment increased. The day, as it
advanced, grew hotter. And suddenly the holy man woke up and began to
hawk and spit all over the compartment. By the time we reached Rawal
Pindi we had decided that the twenty-two rupees we should economise by
remaining seven hours longer among our second-class brothers were not
enough. We had our luggage transferred into a first-class carriage and
paid the difference. The only other occupant of the compartment was an
English official of the Kashmir State, bound for his winter headquarters
at Jammu. He was a dim little man; but at any rate his linen was clean,
and he was not in the least holy. Nobody came in to kiss his feet.

For the rest of the journey I ruminated my anti-clericalism. Indian
friends have assured me that the power of the priests is less than it
was, and goes on rapidly waning. I hope they are right and that the
process may be further accelerated. And not in India alone. There is
still, for my taste, too much kissing of amethyst rings as well as of
slippered feet. There are still too many black coats in the West, too
many orange ones in the East. *Ecrasez l'infâme*. My travelling
companion had made me, for the moment, a thorough-going Voltairian.

It is a simple creed, Voltairianism. In its simplicity lies its charm,
lies the secret of its success --- and also of its fallaciousness. For, in
our muddled human universe, nothing so simple can possibly be true, can
conceivably "work.".

If the *infâme* were squashed, if insecticide were scattered on all the
clerical beetles, whether black or yellow, if pure rationalism became
the universal faith, all would automatically be well. So runs the simple
creed of the anti-clericals. It is too simple, and the assumptions on
which it is based are too sweeping. For, to begin with, is the *infâme*
always infamous, and are the beetles invariably harmful? Obviously not.
Nor can it be said that the behaviour-value of pure rationalism
(whatever the truth-value of its underlying assumptions) is necessarily
superior to the behaviour-value of irrational beliefs which may be and,
in general, almost certainly are untrue. And further, the vast majority
of human beings are not interested in reason or satisfied with what it
teaches. Nor is reason itself the most satisfactory instrument for the
understanding of life. Such are a few of the complications which render
so simple a formula as the anti-clerical's inapplicable to our real and
chaotic existence.

Man's progress has been contingent on his capacity to organise
societies. It is only when protected by surrounding society from
aggression, when freed by the organised labour of society from the
necessity of hunting or digging for his food, it is only, that is to
say, when society has tempered and to a great extent abolished the
struggle for personal existence, that the man of talent can exercise his
capacities to the full. And it is only by a well-organised society that
the results of his labours can be preserved for the enrichment of
succeeding generations. Any force that tends to the strengthening of
society is, therefore, of the highest biological importance. Religion is
obviously such a force. All religions have been unanimous in encouraging
within limits that have tended to grow wider and ever wider, the social,
altruistic, humanitarian proclivities of man and in condemning his
anti-social, self-assertive tendencies. Those who like to speak
anthropomorphically would be justified in saying that religion is a
device employed by the Life Force for the promotion of its evolutionary
designs. But they would be justified in adding that religion is also a
device employed by the Devil for the dissemination of idiocy,
intolerance, and servile abjection. My fellow passenger from Campbellpur
did something, no doubt, to encourage brotherly love, forbearance, and
mutual helpfulness among his flock. But he also did his best to deepen
their congenital stupidity and prevent it from being tempered by the
acquirement of correct and useful knowledge, he did his best to terrify
them with imaginary fears into servility and to flatter them with
groundless hopes into passive contentment with a life unworthy of human
beings. What he did in the name of the evolutionary Life Force, he undid
in the name of the Devil. I cherish a pious hope that he did just a
trifle more than he undid, and that the Devil remained, as the result of
his ministry, by ever so little the loser.
:::



\clearpage
