\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## LAHORE {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The Lahore Museum is rich in Indo--Persian water-colours of the Mogul
period. A few of them are genuinely good. But all are in the highest
degree "amusing" (and in these days, after all, it is to the amusing
rather than to the good in art that we pay our tribute of admiration).

The subjects of these paintings are mostly scenes of domestic and
courtly life, as it was lived in the great Imperial days. If we may
judge by these representations, the distractions of the Moguls were
remarkably simple, simpler even than those in vogue among the grandees
of Europe at the same period. Hunting, war, and love-making, from time
immemorial the sports of kings, were practised as copiously and
patronised as freely by Western potentates as by their Oriental cousins.
But the amusements of "looking at the clouds" was never, so far as I am
aware, a favourite pastime among the great of Europe. In India, on the
contrary, it seems to have been one of the principal occupations of
kings and queens. So ordinary was the pastime that the Mogul artists
found it necessary to invent a special pictorial convention to represent
it. These cloud-gazers, of whom quite a surprising number are portrayed
in the pictures of the Lahore collection, are represented as standing or
reclining on the roofs of their palaces looking up at a sky full of
pitch-black vapours, against which a flight of somewhat heraldic swans
stands out with a peculiar brilliance.

Innocent pleasures! The capacity to enjoy them is perhaps a sign of the
superiority of Oriental civilisation to our own. To Europeans, I am
afraid, this "looking at the clouds" would seem a little tedious. But
then, we are barbarians and entirely ignorant of the art of living. One
of the choicest inventions in the field of this epicurean art, of which
we hurried Westerners know so little, is frequently represented in these
pictures. It is shown in almost all the numerous love scenes between
black-bearded nawabs and fawn-eyed, trousered beauties, which form the
nucleus of this delightful collection. Any fool, any savage can make
love --- of a kind. But it needs a *viveur* of genius to think of
combining amorous dalliance --- on carpets, be it added, of the most
exquisite Persian design --- with the leisured smoking of a silver and
crystal hookah. That, surely, is true art.

***

By the kindness of our hospitable friends at Lahore, we were able to
hear a good deal of Indian music, both classical and popular. Indian
music is innocent of any harmony more subtle than that with which the
bagpipe has made us familiar --- the drone on the dominant. It knows of no
form more highly organised than that of the air with variations. It is
played on but few instruments (two kinds of lute and a kind of
wire-stringed viola are the commonest), and these few are, alas, rapidly
being ousted by a form of miniature American harmonium, pumped with one
hand and played with one finger of the other. Yet, in spite of these
limitations, Indian music is surprisingly rich and various. How rich and
how various depends entirely upon the individual player. For in India,
where music has never been committed to writing, but is an affair of
tradition tempered by personal inspiration, the part of the interpreter
is more important even than with us. Of European music even a bad player
can give us some idea; and those who have acquired the art of reading a
score can get their musical pleasure through the eye alone. Not so in
India. Here the performer is all-important. He is everything; not only
the interpreter, but also the repository and publisher of
music --- Breitkopf and Hartel as well as Paganini; not only the guardian
of ancient tradition, but also the inspired improvisatore. The bad
performer can give you nothing of Indian music.

At Lahore, we were fortunate in hearing a most accomplished performer on
the sitar or Indian lute. He was a middle-aged man with a walrus
moustache and an explosion of most musical long hair, in the centre of
which he wore a red plush cap embroidered with gold. He looked, I
thought, like a reproduction in brown of an old-fashioned German
pianist. But how humble, in comparison with the lordly artists of
Europe, how very definitely an inferior the poor man was! He sat on the
floor awaiting our good pleasure, played when he was told, stopped at a
word in the middle of a musical phrase, played on uncomplainingly
through our conversation. Music in India has strangely come down in the
world. From being, it is said, the accomplishment of princesses, it has
come to be the monopoly of prostitutes. Courtesans are the only
professional female musicians in India, and very many of the male
professionals are only the hereditary teachers of courtesans. Our
musician had climbed a little way above his congenital station in life;
he gave lessons to amateurs.

The sitar is a long-necked guitar, bellied with the half of a bisected
pumpkin (and having, sometimes, the second half attached like a goitre
to its neck), wire-strung, and played with a plectrum. From this lute a
skilled musician can draw an extraordinary variety of sounds --- from
sharp staccato to notes long-drawn, as though produced by a bow; from
clear, full, ringing sounds to a whining slither through fractions of a
tone; from loudly martial to sweet and tender. The melody is played only
on the first string, the remaining wires (tuned to sound the dominant,
in various octaves, of the key to whose tonic the first string is tuned)
being used to produce the accompanying drone.

Our lutanist's repertory was large, and he was prepared to play anything
we asked for. Folk-songs in the pentatonic blacknote scale --- first
cousins, these, to what we are accustomed to regard as
characteristically Scottish airs --- were followed by classical pieces, in
which the most elaborate variations were embroidered on themes that
sounded now Gregorian, now like a rambling and, to our ears, rather
tuneless Western folk-song. We heard specimens of the music that is
supposed to be played only in the morning, and specimens of that which
is intended for the night. We heard the delightful song that is meant to
be sung in cloudy weather. We heard the snake-charmer's music, built up
round a most snaky phrase of descending semi-tones, and the
camel-driver's song, wailing and romantic. Generally the instrument
sounded alone. But sometimes the minstrel lifted his shaggy head and
gave vent to shrill tenor notes, neighed out from somewhere between the
nose and the upper gullet. Strange sounds, and to our ears somewhat
ludicrous, particularly when taken in conjunction with certain nods and
vibrations of the head, certain almost girlishly coquettish gestures
made with a hand that was lifted for the purpose from the sounding
strings.

I was able to understand and appreciate the music tolerably well. All of
it, that is, except the music played, traditionally, when a man gives up
the world for the life of meditation. One of these renunciatory
pieces --- a most elaborate, classical affair --- was played for our
benefit. But I must confess that, listen as I might, I was unable to
hear anything particularly mournful or serious, anything specially
suggestive of self-sacrifice in the piece. To my Western ears it sounded
much more cheerful than the dance which followed it.

Emotions are everywhere the same; but the artistic expression of them
varies from age to age and from one country to another. We are brought
up to accept the conventions current in the society into which we are
born. This sort of art, we learn in childhood, is meant to excite
laughter, that to evoke our tears. Such conventions vary with great
rapidity, even in the same country. There are Elizabethan dances that
sound as melancholy to our ears as little funeral marches. Conversely,
we are made to laugh by the "Anglo--Saxon attitudes" of the holiest
personages in the drawings and miniatures of earlier centuries. Only
with the aid of a historically trained imagination can we see or hear as
our ancestors heard or saw. Remoteness in space divides no less than
remoteness in time, and to the untrained auditor or spectator the
artistic conventions of strangers are as little comprehensible as those
of his own fathers.

It is in the visual arts that the conventions for the expression of
emotions vary most widely. This is due, I suppose, to two main causes,
of a character respectively physiological and intellectual. Form and
colour have very little direct physiological effect upon the perceiving
organism. Sounds, on the other hand, act directly on the nerves and can
stimulate, exasperate, daze, bemuse, as forms and colours can never do.
Certain types of rhythmical sounds produce certain almost specific
effects upon the nervous system. It is obvious that in forming his
conventions of expressions the musician must take into account these
specific physiological effects of sound. Drumbeats and loud brassy notes
sounded in regular, even time are specifically exciting; it therefore
follows that the convention for expressing the martial emotions can
never involve slow croonings of violins in an undulating three-four
time, or elaborate bird-like warblings on the flute. Thus it comes about
that there is a certain family likeness common to the conventions of
expression of every system of music --- a family likeness which does not
exist among the conventions of the various systems of pictorial art. But
even in music the differences between the conventions of expression are
very great. Music affects us physiologically through rhythm and the
volume and quality of sounds. Conventions, which we have come to regard
as fundamental, but which do not involve these particular factors, are
found, when we compare them with the conventions of other systems, to be
purely arbitrary. Thus, what we regard as the fundamental difference
between major and minor keys --- the minor being for us essentially
melancholy --- is not fundamental at all, but the result of a recent and
arbitrary convention of Western musicians. Before the seventeenth
century the convention did not exist even in European music, and in
Oriental music it is not thought of, the most cheerful, jolly, and
martial music being pitched in the minor.

So much for physiology. There are other and purely intellectual reasons
why the conventions of expression should vary more widely in the
different systems of visual art than they do in the systems of music.
The visual arts lend themselves to storytelling and the symbolical
exposition of philosophical theories and religious dogmas. Music does
not. Thus, to Western eyes, the picture of a man with four arms, an
elephant's head, and a lotus growing out of his navel seems grotesque.
But an orthodox Hindu would see nothing comical in it. To us pictures of
monsters and impossible hybrids are by convention, funny. To him they
are symbolical of the highest truths.
:::


\clearpage
