\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## AMRITSAR {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The Golden Temple of the Sikhs is genuinely eighteen carat. It is also
exceedingly sacred. Holiness and costliness make up for any lack of
architectural merit. For architecturally the temple is less than
nothing. We went in bare-footed --- the Sikhs insist on this sign of
respect. Picking our way among the bird droppings and expectorated betel
that strewed the causeway, we advanced gingerly towards the most golden
and holiest of the shrines which stands islanded in the middle of the
sacred tank. In the holy of holies three magnificent old men were
chanting ecstatically to the accompaniment of a small portable
harmonium, which was being played with one finger by a fourth, yet more
superbly patriarchal. We listened with reverence, were offered by the
verger some sugar-plums --- symbolical, no doubt, of something --- deposited
an alms and retraced our squeamish steps along the causeway.

In the street a young beggar, half-witted, or feigning imbecility,
pursued us, pitiably moaning as though he were being tortured. Bearded
Akalis passed us carrying their swords. A group of male prostitutes,
painted, jewelled, and dressed like women, loitered at a street corner.
We turned down a narrow passage and found ourselves in the Jalianwalla
Bagh, the scene of General Dyer's exploits in 1919. It is a piece of
waste ground enclosed by walls and houses. The narrow passage down which
we had come appeared to be the only entrance. A bad place for a crowd to
be caught and fired on with machine-guns. One could kill more people
here, and in a shorter time, than in most plots of ground of equal area.
General Dyer proved it experimentally.

Dyer's reversion to the old-fashioned methods of Aurangzeb evoked a good
deal of unfriendly comment at home. It was found shocking and
un-English. At the same time, it had to be admitted that his
ruthlessness had achieved what it had been intended to achieve. It put a
stop to what might have turned into a revolution. The blood of the
martyrs is by no means invariably the seed of the church. The victims of
the Inquisition died in vain; Protestantism disappeared from Spain as
completely as the Albigensian faith from Southern France, or as
Christianity from North Africa. Persecution can always succeed, provided
that it is sufficiently violent and long-drawn. The Romans persecuted
feebly and by fits --- enough to stimulate the persecuted to fresh
efforts, but not enough to destroy them; enough to arouse sympathy for
their victims, but not enough to deter the sympathisers. That was why
the blood of the early Christian martyrs was indeed the seed of their
church. If the Romans had been as systematically ruthless as the
Christians were to show themselves in future centuries, the infant
church could never have survived. Anybody who has the power and is
prepared to go on using it indefinitely and without compunction, can
force his will on the whole world. It is obvious.

It was rarely in the past that anyone possessed of power showed himself
in the least reluctant to use it to the full. If the Romans failed to
persecute Christianity with an adequate ferocity, that was due to their
failure to realise its anti-Imperial significance, not to any
conscientious dislike to violent persecution as such. Things are
different now, at any rate in the West. Men have become reluctant to use
their power to the full, to carry authority to its logical conclusion in
brute force. Those who possessed power have voluntarily abstained from
making full use of it, have even deprived themselves of their power for
the benefit of the powerless. Oligarchs have granted privileges to the
disinherited; industrialists have passed laws to restrain themselves
from exploiting to excess their workmen. Instead of shooting their
unwilling subjects wholesale, the owners of colonies have dealt out
constitutions. The criminal is no longer cruelly punished, and even the
domestic animal is now legally protected from the violences of its human
master.

Living as we do in the midst of this historical process, which we
vaguely call "the humanitarian movement," we are unable to realise the
strangeness and fundamental novelty of it. Tennyson warned us against
"the craven fear of being great (at other people's expense); but the
craven fear has gone on steadily growing, in spite of him. What seems to
us extraordinary to-day is not some symptom of reluctance to use power
but its ruthless, full, and unhesitating employment. We are amazed, not
by President Wilson, but by Mussolini; not by Chelmsford and Montague,
but by Dyer. At any other period of the world's history than this, Dyer
and Mussolini would have seemed the normal ones.

In Europe the new feelings about force and power have gradually grown
up, the new policy which is the result of them has been developed by
degrees. We have been brought up with them; they seem natural to us. We
are too familiar with them to realise them. The anti-democratic reaction
in Italy and Spain and Russia has made many of us for the first time
acutely conscious of these humanitarian feelings, has rendered the
nature of this democratic policy explicitly clear.

Nowhere is the contrast between old and new more striking than in India.
For humanitarian feelings are not native to the Indian soil. The life of
a cow, it is true, is respected, but not the life of a man. Humanitarian
feelings with regard to men have been introduced artificially, from
outside. And the democratic system of policy in which these feelings
normally result has been grafted suddenly on another system, whose
general benevolence of intention made it none the less despotic. Old and
new strangely coexist, and India is ruled in accordance with two
completely incompatible theories of government: that of Akbar, shall we
say, and that of Woodrow Wilson. On Monday the watchword of the
Executive is "Reform and Responsible Self-Government"; like Oliver
Twist, the Indians immediately ask for more; their demands become
alarmingly insistent, and the Government nervously decides to be firm.
On Tuesday some General Dyer rivals the exploits of the Moguls;
repressive legislation is passed, the gaols are crowded. On Wednesday
the Government is seized with conscientious qualms; remembering what Mr.
Gladstone said in 1882 and why the Great War was fought, it makes a
"generous gesture." The response is so unenthusiastic that it becomes
necessary on Thursday to suspend the _Habeas Corpus Act_ and imprison
several thousand suspects without a trial. By the end of the week,
everybody, including the Government itself, is feeling rather muddled.
And what about next week, and the week after that, and all the other
weeks that are to follow?
:::


\clearpage
