\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## AGRA {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
I am always a little uncomfortable when I find myself unable to admire
something which all the rest of the world admires --- or at least is
reputed to admire. Am I, or is the world the fool? Is it the world's
taste that is bad, or is mine? I am reluctant to condemn myself, and
almost equally reluctant to believe that I alone am right. Thus, when
all men (and not the professors of English literature only, but Milton
too, but Wordsworth and Keats) assure me that Spenser is a great poet, I
wonder what to do. For to me Spenser seems only a virtuoso, a man with
the conjuror's tricks of extracting perfectly rhymed stanzas by the
hundred, out of an empty mind. Perhaps I am unduly prejudiced in favour
of sense; but it has always seemed to me that poets should have
something to say. Spenser's is the art of saying nothing, at length, in
rhyme and rumbling metre. The world admires; but I cannot. I wish I
could.

Here at Agra I find myself afflicted by the same sense of discomfort.
The Taj Mahal is one of the seven wonders. My guide assures me that it
is "perhaps the most beautiful building in the world." Following its
advice, we drove out to have our first look at the marvel by the light
of the setting sun. Nature did its best for the Taj. The west was duly
red, and orange, and yellow, and, finally, emerald green, grading into
pale and flawless blue towards the zenith. Two evening stars, Venus and
Mercury, pursued the sunken sun. The sacred Jumna was like a sheet of
silver between its banks. Beyond it the plains stretched greyly away
into the vapours of distance. The gardens were rich with turf, with
cypresses, palms, and peepul trees, with long shadows and rosy lights,
with the noise of grasshoppers, the calling of enormous owls, the
indefatigable hammering of a coppersmith bird. Nature, I repeat, did its
best. But though it adorned, it could not improve the works of man. The
Taj, even at sunset, even reverberated upside down from tanks and river,
even in conjunction with melancholy cypresses --- the Taj was a
disappointment.

My failure to appreciate the Taj is due, I think, to the fact that,
while I am very fond of architecture and the decorative arts, I am very
little interested in the expensive or the picturesque, as such and by
themselves. Now the great qualities of the Taj are precisely those of
expensiveness and picturesqueness. Milk-white amongst its dark
cypresses, flawlessly mirrored, it is positively the *Toteninsel* of
Arnold Boecklin come true. And its costliness is fabulous. Its marbles
are carved and filigreed, are patterned with an inlay of precious
stones. The smallest rose or poppy on the royal tombs is an affair of
twenty or thirty cornelians, onyxes, agates, chrysolites. The New
Jerusalem was not more rich in variety of precious pebbles. If the
Viceroy took it into his head to build another Taj identical with the
first, he would have to spend as much as a fifteenth, or even perhaps a
twelfth or tenth of what he spends each year on the Indian Army.
Imagination staggers ...

This inordinate costliness is what most people seem to like about the
Taj. And if they are disappointed with it (I have met several who were,
and always for the same reason) it is because the building is not quite
so expensive as they thought it was. Clambering among the roofs they
have found evidence to show that the marble is only a veneer over
cheaper masonry, not solid. It is a swindle! Meanwhile the guides and
guardians are earning their money by insisting on the Taj's costliness.
"All marble," they say, "all precious stones." They want you to touch as
well as look, to realise the richness not with eyes alone, but
intimately with the fingers. I have seen guides in Europe doing the
same. Expensiveness is everywhere admired. The average tourist is moved
to greater raptures by St. Peter's than by his own St. Paul's. The
interior of the Roman basilica is all of marble. St. Paul's is only
Portland stone. The relative architectural merits of the two churches
are not for a moment considered.

Architecturally, the worst features of the Taj are its minarets. These
four thin tapering towers standing at the four corners of the platform
on which the Taj is built are among the ugliest structures ever erected
by human hands. True, the architect might offer a number of excuses for
his minarets. He would begin by pointing out that, the dimensions of the
main building and the platform being what they are, it was impossible to
give the four subsidiary structures more than a certain limited mass
between them, a mass small in proportion to the Taj itself.
Architecturally, no doubt, it would have been best to put this
definitely limited mass into four low buildings of comparatively large
plan. But unfortunately, the exigencies of religion made it necessary to
put the available mass into minarets. This mass being small, it was
necessary that the minarets should be very thin for their height.

These excuses, so far as they go, are perfectly valid. By the laws of
religion there had to be minarets, and by the laws of proportion the
minarets had to be unconscionably slender. But there was no need to make
them feebly taper, there was no need to pick out the component blocks of
which they are built with edgings of black, and above all there was no
need to surround the shaft of the minarets with thick clumsy balconies
placed, moreover, at just the wrong intervals of distance from one
another and from the ground.

The Taj itself is marred by none of the faults which characterise the
minarets. But its elegance is at the best of a very dry and negative
kind. Its "classicism" is the product not of intellectual restraint
imposed on an exuberant fancy, but of an actual deficiency of fancy, a
poverty of imagination. One is struck at once by the lack of variety in
the architectural forms of which it is composed. There are, for all
practical purposes, only two contrasting formal elements in the whole
design --- the onion dome, reproduced in two dimensions in the pointed
arches of the recessed bays, and the flat wall surface with its sharply
rectangular limits. When the Taj is compared with more or less
contemporary European buildings in the neo-classic style of the High
Renaissance and Baroque periods, this poverty in the formal elements
composing it becomes very apparent. Consider, for example, St. Paul's.
The number of component forms in its design is very large. We have the
hemispherical dome, the great colonnaded cylinder of the drum, the flat
side-walls relieved by square-faced pilasters and rounded niches; we
have, at one end, the curved surfaces of the apse and, at the other, the
West Front with its porch --- a design of detached cylinders (the
pillars), seen against a flat wall, and supporting yet another formal
element, the triangular pediment. If it is argued that St. Paul's is a
very much larger building than the Taj, and that we should therefore
expect the number of contrasting elements in its design to be greater,
we may take a smaller specimen of late Renaissance architecture as our
standard of comparison. I suggest Palladio's Rotonda at Vicenza, a
building somewhat smaller than the Taj and, like it, of regular design
and domed. Analysing the Rotonda we shall find that it consists of a far
larger number of formal elements than does the Taj, and that its
elegance, in consequence, is much richer, much more subtle and various
than the poor, dry, negative elegance characteristic of the Indian
building.

But it is not necessary to go as far as Europe to find specimens of a
more varied and imaginative elegance than that of the Taj. The Hindu
architects produced buildings incomparably more rich and interesting as
works of art. I have not visited Southern India where, it is said, the
finest specimens of Hindu architecture are to be found. But I have seen
enough of the art in Rajputana to convince me of its enormous
superiority to any work of the Mohammedans. The temples at Chitor, for
example, are specimens of true classicism. They are the products of a
prodigious, an almost excessive, fancy, held in check and directed by
the most judicious intelligence. Their elegance --- and in their way they
are just as elegant as the Taj --- is an opulent and subtle elegance, full
of unexpected felicities. The formal elements of their design are
numerous and pleasingly contrasted, and the detail --- mouldings and
ornamental sculpture --- is always, however copious, subordinated to the
architectural scheme and of the highest decorative quality.

In this last respect Hindu ornament is decidedly superior to that
employed by the later Moguls. The *pietra dura* work at the Taj and the
Shahdara tombs at Lahore is marvellously neat in execution and of
extravagant costliness. These qualities are admirable in their way; but
they have nothing to do with the decorative value of the work considered
as art. As works of art, the *pietra dura* decorations of the Taj are
poor and uninteresting. Arabesques of far finer design are to be seen in
the carved and painted ornamentation of Rajput palaces and temples. As
for the *bas reliefs* of flowers which adorn the gateway of the
Taj --- these are frankly bad. The design of them vacillates uncertainly
between realism and conventionalism. They are neither life-like
portraits of flowers nor good pieces of free floral decoration. How any
one who has ever seen a fine specimen of decorative flower-painting or
flower-carving, whether Hindu or European, can possibly admire these
feebly laborious reliefs passes my understanding. Indeed, it seems to me
that any one who professes an ardent admiration for the Taj must look at
it without having any standards of excellence in his mind --- as though
the thing existed uniquely, in a vacuum. But the Taj exists in a world
well sprinkled with masterpieces of architecture and decoration. Compare
it with these, and the Imperial Mausoleum at once takes its proper place
in the hierarchy of art --- well down below the best. But it is made of
marble. Marble, I perceive, covers a multitude of sins.
:::


\clearpage
