\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## FATEHPUR SIKRI {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Akbar built the city as a small personal tribute to himself. The vanity
of Indian potentates had a way of running to brand new cities. Witness
Jai Singh's Jaipur, five miles from the existing and perfectly
satisfactory town of Amber; Jodha's Jodhpur, an hour's walk from Mandor;
the Udaipur of Udai Singh next door to Arh. An expensive form of royal
vanity; but one for which the modern tourist should be grateful. There
is nothing more picturesque than a deserted city, nothing more
mournfully romantic. These deserted cities of Northern India are
particularly romantic because, being relatively modern, they are all in
an excellent state of preservation. For a building that is intact, but
deserted, is much more romantic, more picturesquely melancholy than a
deserted ruin. One expects a ruin to be deserted; nobody, it is obvious,
could possibly live in Pompeii, or among the roofless remains of an
English abbey. But in a building that is intact one expects to find
inhabitants. When such a building is deserted, we are mournfully
surprised; and the contrast between its emptiness and intactness strikes
us as being strange and suggestive.

Fatehpur is less than four hundred years old, and, so far as the
principal buildings are concerned, it is in a state of perfect
preservation. The red sandstone which Akbar used in the building of his
city is a hard, weather-resisting rock. The sculpture, the mouldings are
still clean-edged and sharp. There has been no blurring of outlines, no
crumbling, no leprous decay. Akbar's red city stands today in the
condition in which he left it --- and stands empty, untenanted even by the
monkeys which inhabit so many of India's deserted palaces and temples.

To those whom the dry and sterile elegance of Shah Jahan's Agra has left
unsatisfied, the architecture of Fatehpur Sikri will seem refreshing.
For the greatest of the alien Mohammedan emperors was a patron of the
indigenous Hindu art of India, and the architecture of his capital is
marked by something of the genuine Hindu vigour and wealth of
imagination. The *liwan* or covered portion of the mosque is
particularly fine. It is divided up into three square chambers, in line
and communicating; and the characteristically Hindu ceilings of these
chambers are supported by a number of very tall Hindu columns. The
building is superb in proportion and detail, and is certainly one of the
finest pieces of interior architecture on a large scale to be seen in
Upper India. And yet, such is the prestige of expensive material that
poor uninteresting buildings, wholly lacking in grandeur or originality,
like the Pearl Mosque at Agra, the pavilions by the lake at Ajmere, are
much more widely celebrated. They are of marble; Fatehpur is only of
sandstone.

It was late in the afternoon when we left the deserted city. The walls
and domes glowed more rosily than ever in the light of the almost level
sun. It had become a city of coral. There was a screaming in the air
above us. Looking up we saw a flock of parrots flying across the pale
sky. The shadow of the enormous Gate of Victory was upon them; but a
moment later they emerged from it into the bright transfiguring
sunlight. Over the courts of that deserted city of coral and ruddy gold
a flight of emerald birds passed glittering and was gone.
:::


\clearpage
