\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## JAIPUR {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Jaipur did not casually grow; it was made. Its streets are broad and
straight, and intersect one another at right angles, like the streets of
Turin or of some American city. The houses are all bright pink, and look
like those charming and curiously improbable pieces of architecture in
the backgrounds of Italian primitives. It is an orthodox and pious town.
The pavements are thronged with ruminating bulls and Brahmins and
fakirs; the shops do a thriving trade in phallic symbols, of which the
manufacture, in gilt and painted marble, seems to be one of the staple
industries of the place. In the streets men ride on horses, on enormous
camels; or are driven in ancient victorias, in still more extraordinary
four-wheelers that look like sections cut out of third-class railway
coaches, or, most often, in little carts with domed canopies and (if the
occupants happen to be ladies) concealing curtains, drawn by smart pairs
of trotting bullocks, whose horns are painted green. Only the women of
the people are visible in the streets. They move with the princely grace
of those who, with pots and baskets on their heads, have passed their
lives in practising the deportment of queens. Their full skirts swing as
they walk, and at every step the heavy brass bangles at their feet make
a loud and, oh! --- for this is India --- a mournfully symbolical clanking
as of fetters.

***

At Jaipur we were fortunate in having an introduction to one of the
great *thakurs* of the State. He was a mighty land holder, the owner of
twenty villages with populations ranging from five hundred to as many
thousands, a feudal lord who paid for his fief (until, a year or two
ago, a somewhat simpler and more modern system of tenure was introduced)
by contributing to the State army one hundred and fifty armed and
mounted men. This nobleman was kind enough to place his elephant at our
disposal.

It was a superb and particularly lofty specimen, with gold-mounted
tusks; ate two hundredweights of food a day and must have cost at least
six hundred a year to keep. An expensive pet. But for a man in the
*thakur's* position, we gathered, indispensable, a necessity. Pachyderms
in Rajputana are what glass coaches were in Europe a century and a half
ago --- essential luxuries.

The *thakur* was a charming and cultured man, hospitably kind as only
Indians can be. But at the risk of seeming' ungrateful, I must confess,
that, of all the animals I have ever ridden, the elephant is the most
uncomfortable mount. On the level, it is true, the motion is not too
bad. One seems to be riding on a small chronic earthquake; that is all.
The earthquake becomes more disquieting when the beast begins to climb.
But when it goes downhill, it is like the end of the world. The animal
descends very slowly and with an infinite caution, planting one huge
foot deliberately before the other, and giving you time between each
calculated step to anticipate the next convulsive spasm of movement --- a
spasm that seems to loosen from its place every organ in the rider's
body, that twists the spine, that wrenches all the separate muscles of
the loins and thorax. The hills round Jaipur are not very high.
Fortunately; for by the end of the three or four hundred feet of our
climbing and descending, we had almost reached the limits of our
endurance. I returned full of admiration for Hannibal. He crossed the
Alps on an elephant.

We made two expeditions with the pachyderm; one --- over a rocky pass
entailing, there and back, two climbs and two sickening descents --- to
the tanks and ruined temples of Galta, and one to the deserted palaces
of Amber. Emerging from the palace precincts --- I record the trivial and
all too homely incident, because it set me mournfully reflecting about
the cosmos --- our monster halted and, with its usual deliberation,
relieved nature, portentously. Hardly, the operation over, had it
resumed its march when an old woman who had been standing at the door of
a hovel among the ruins, expectantly waiting --- we had wondered for
what --- darted forward and fairly threw herself on the mound of steaming
excrement. There was fuel here, I suppose, for a week's cooking.
"_Salaam, Maharaj_," she called up to us, bestowing in her gratitude the
most opulent title she could lay her tongue to. Our passage had been to
her like a sudden and unexpected fall of manna. She thanked us, she
blessed the great and charitable Jumbo for his Gargantuan bounty.

Our earthquake lurched on. I thought of the scores of millions of human
beings to whom the passage of an unconstipated elephant seems a godsend,
a stroke of enormous good luck. The thought depressed me. Why are we
here, men and women, eighteen hundred millions of us, on this remarkable
and perhaps unique planet? To what end? Is it to go about looking for
dung --- cow dung, horse dung, the enormous and princely excrement of
elephants? Evidently it is --- for a good many of us at any rate. It
seemed an inadequate reason, I thought, for our being here --- immortal
souls, first cousins of the angels, own brothers of Buddha and Mozart
and Sir Isaac Newton.

But a little while later I saw that I was wrong to let the consideration
depress me. If it depressed me, that was only because I looked at the
whole matter from the wrong end, so to speak. In painting my mental
picture of the dung-searchers I had filled my foreground with the
figures of Sir Isaac Newton and the rest of them. These, I perceived,
should have been relegated to the remote background and the foreground
should have been filled with cows and elephants. The picture so
arranged, I should have been able to form a more philosophical and
proportionable estimate of the dung-searchers. For I should have seen at
a glance how vastly superior were their activities to those of the
animal producers of dung in the foreground. The philosophical Martian
would admire the dung-searchers for having discovered a use for dung; no
other animal, he would point out, has had the wit to do more than
manufacture it.

We are not Martians and our training makes us reluctant to think of
ourselves as animals. Nobody inquires why cows and elephants inhabit the
world. There is as little *reason* why we should be here, eating,
drinking, sleeping, and in the intervals reading metaphysics, saying
prayers, or collecting dung. We *are* here, that is all; and like other
animals we do what our native capacities and our environment permit of
our doing. Our achievement, when we compare it with that of cows and
elephants, is remarkable. They automatically make dung; we collect it
and turn it into fuel. It is not something to be depressed about; it is
something to be proud of. Still, in spite of the consolations of
philosophy, I remained pensive.

***

There is a mirror room in the fort at Agra; there are others in almost
all the palaces of Rajputana. But the prettiest of them all are the
mirror rooms in the palace of Amber. Indeed, I never remember to have
seen mirrors anywhere put to better decorative use than here, in this
deserted Rajput palace of the seventeenth century. There are no large
sheets of glass at Amber; there is no room for large sheets. A bold and
elegant design in raised plaster work covers the walls and ceiling; the
mirrors are small and shaped to fit into the interstices of the plaster
pattern. Like all old mirrors they are grey and rather dim. Looking into
them you see "in a glass, darkly." They do not portray the world with
that glaring realism which characterises the reverberations of modern
mirrors. But their greatest charm is that they are slightly convex, so
that every piece gives back its own small particular image of the world
and each, when the shutters are opened, or a candle is lit, has a glint
in its grey surface like the curved high-light in an eye.

They are wonderfully rich, these mirror rooms at Amber. Their
elaborateness surpasses that even of the famous mirror room at Bagheria,
near Palermo. But whereas the Sicilian room is nothing more than the
old-fashioned glass-and-gilding merry-go-round made stationary, the
Indian rooms are a marvel of cool and elegant refinement. True, this
form of decoration does not lend itself to the adornment of large areas
of wall or ceiling; it is too intricate for that. But fortunately the
rooms in Indian palaces are seldom large. In a country where it rains
with a punctual regularity and only at one season of the year, large
rooms of assembly are unnecessary. Crowds are accommodated and
ceremonials of state performed more conveniently out of doors than in.
The Hall of Audience in an Indian palace is a small pillared pavilion
placed at one end of an open courtyard. The king sat in the pavilion,
his courtiers and petitioners thronged the open space. Every room in the
palace was a private room, a place of intimacy. One must not come to
India expecting to find grandiose specimens of interior architecture.
There are no long colonnaded vistas, no galleries receding interminably
according to all the laws of perspective, no colossal staircases, no
vaults so high that at night the lamplight can hardly reach them. Here
in India, there are only small rooms adorned with the elaborate
decoration that is meant to be looked at from close to and in detail.
Such are the mirror rooms at Amber.
:::


\clearpage
