\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## BIKANER {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The desert of Rajputana is a kind of Sahara but smaller and without
oases. Travelling across it, one looks out over plains of brown dust.
Once in every ten or twenty yards, some grey-green plant, deep-rooted,
and too thorny for even camels to eat, tenaciously, and with a kind of
desperate vegetable ferocity, struggles for life. And at longer
intervals, draining the moisture of a rood of land, there rise, here and
there, the little stunted trees of the desert. From close at hand the
sparseness of their distantly scattered growth is manifest. But seen in
depth down the long perspective of receding distance, they seem --- like
the in fact remotely scattered stars of the Milky Way --- numerous and
densely packed. Close at hand the desert is only rarely flecked by
shade; but the further distances seem flecked with a dense dark growth
of trees. The foreground is always desert, but on every horizon there is
the semblance of shadowy forests. The train rolls on, and the forests
remain for ever on the horizon; around one is always and only the
desert.

Bikaner is the metropolis of this desert, a great town islanded in the
sand. The streets are unpaved, but clean. The sand of which they are
made desiccates and drinks up every impurity that falls upon it. And
what astonishing houses flank these streets! Huge *palazzi* of red
sandstone, carved and fretted from basement to attic, their blank
walls --- wherever a wall has been left blank --- whitewashed and painted
with garishly ingenuous modern frescoes of horses, of battles, of trains
running over bridges, of ships. These houses, the like of which we had
seen in no other city, are the palaces of the Marwari merchants, the
Jews of India, who go forth from their desert into the great towns,
whence they return with the fruits of their business ability to their
native place. Some of them are said to be fabulously wealthy, and
Bikaner has, I suppose, more millionaires per thousand of population
than any other town in the world.

We were shown over the country villa of one of these plutocrats, built
in the desert a mile or two beyond the city wall. Costly and unflagging
labour had created and conserved in the teeth of the sand, the scorching
wind of summer and the winter frosts, a garden of trees and lawns, of
roses and English vegetables. It is the marvel of Bikaner.

The sun was setting as we reached the bungalow. A little army of coolies
was engaged in covering the lawns with tarpaulin sheets and fitting
canvas greatcoats on all the shrubs. The night frosts are dangerous at
this season. In summer, on the other hand, it is by day that the verdure
must be jacketted. Such is horticulture in Rajputana.

I had hoped, too optimistically, to find in the Marwari plutocrats the
modern equivalents of the Florentine merchant-princes of the
*quattrocento*. But this pleasing bubble of illusion burst, with an
almost audible pop, as we passed from the millionaire's garden into his
house. The principal drawing-room was furnished almost exclusively with
those polychromatic *art nouveau* busts that issue from the workshops of
the tombstone manufacturers of Carrara, and with clockwork toys. These
last had all been set going, simultaneously, in our honour. A confused
ticking and clicking filled the air, and wherever we looked our eyes
were dizzied by movement. Tigers, almost life size, nodded their heads.
Pink *papier-mâché* pigs opened and shut their mouths. Clocks in the
form of negroes rolled their eyes; in the form of fox-terriers wagged
their tails and, opening their jaws to bark, uttered a tick; in the form
of donkeys agitated their long ears sixty times a minute. And,
preciously covered by a glass dome, a porcelain doll, dressed in the
Paris fashions of 1900, jerkily applied a powder-puff to its nose, and
jerkily reached back to the powder-box --- again and again. These,
evidently, are the products of our Western civilisation which the East
really admires. I remembered a certain brooch which I had seen one
evening, at a dinner-party, on the _sari_ of an Indian lady of great
wealth and the highest position --- a brooch consisting of a disc of blue
enamel surrounded by diamonds, on the face of which two large brilliants
revolved, by clockwork, in concentric circles and opposite directions.
It was an eight-day brooch, I learned, wound every Sunday night.

***

In the desert, five miles out of Bikaner, stands a city of tombs, the
cenotaphs of the _Maharajas_ and their royal kindred. They are to be
counted by scores and hundreds --- little white domes perched on pillars,
or covering cells of masonry. Under each dome a little slab bears the
name of the commemorated dead. In the older tombs these slabs are carved
with crude reliefs representing the prince, sometimes on horseback,
sometimes sitting on his throne, accompanied by as many of his wives
and concubines as burnt themselves to death on his funeral pyre. Few of
these Maharajas of an earlier generation left the world without taking
with them two or three unfortunate women. Some of them were accompanied
to the fire by six, seven, and in one case, I counted even nine victims.
On the slab their images form a little frieze below the image of their
lord and master --- a row of small identical figures stretching across the
stone. Nine luscious Hindu beauties, deep-bosomed, small-waisted,
sumptuously haunched --- their portraits are deliciously amusing. But
looking at them, I could not help remembering the dreadful thing these
little sculptures commemorated. I thought of the minutes of torment that
ushered them out of life into this comical world of art which they now
inhabit, under the weather-stained domes in the desert. Every here and
there stands a tomb on whose central slab is carved a small conventional
pair of feet. These are the feet of those royal ladies who, for one
reason or another, did not commit *sati*. Each time I saw a pair of
these marble feet I felt like calling for cheers.
:::


\clearpage
