\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## JODHPUR {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Standing on the ramparts of the Jodhpur fort --- on a level with the
highest wheelings of the vultures, whose nests are on the ledges of the
precipices beneath the walls --- one looks down on to the roofs of the
city, hundreds of feet below. And every noise from the streets and
houses comes floating up, diminished but incredibly definite and clear,
a multitudinous chorus, in which, however, one can distinguish all the
separate component sounds --- crying and laughter, articulate speech,
brayings and bellowings and bleatings, the creak and rumble of wheels,
the hoarse hooting of a conch, the pulsing of drums. I have stood on
high places above many cities, but never on one from which the separate
sounds making up the great counterpoint of a city's roaring could be so
clearly heard, so precisely sifted by the listening ear. From the
bastions of Jodhpur Fort one hears as the gods must hear from their
Olympus --- the gods to whom each separate word uttered in the innumerably
peopled world below comes up distinct and individual to be recorded in
the books of omniscience.

***

It was late in the afternoon when we drove past the Courts of Justice.
The day's business was over and the sweepers were at work, making clean
for the morrow. Outside one of the doors of the building stood a row of
brimming waste-paper baskets, and from these, as from mangers, two or
three sacred bulls were slowly and majestically feeding. When the
baskets were empty officious hands from within replenished them with a
fresh supply of torn and scribbled paper. The bulls browsed on; it was a
literary feast.

Watching them at their meal, I understood why it is that Indian bulls
are so strangely mild. On a diet of waste-paper, it would be difficult
for them to be anything but disciples of Gandhi, devotees of
non-violence and *ahimsa*. I also understood why it is that Indian cows
yield so little milk and, further, why the cattle of either sex are so
often afflicted with hiccoughs. Before I came to India, I had never
heard a bull hiccoughing. It is a loud and terrifying sound. Hearing
behind me that explosive combination of a bellow and a bark, I have
often started in alarm, thinking I was on the point of being attacked.
But looking round, I would find that it was only one of the mild,
dyspeptic totems of the Hindus, gorged with waste-paper and painfully,
uncontrollably belching as it walked.

The effects on horses of a certainly insufficient and probably also
unnatural diet are different. They do not hiccough --- at least I never
heard them hiccoughing. But as they trot the withered and emptily
sagging entrails in their bellies give forth, at every step, a strange
sound like the leathery creaking of organ bellows. It is a most
distressing sound, but one to which all those who drive in Indian tongas
must learn to accustom themselves.

***

At the time when the question of putting an end to the East India
Company's monopoly was under discussion there were several distinguished
English administrators who argued that, quite apart from all
considerations of commercial interests, it would be highly impolitic to
open the country freely to European immigration. So far from
strengthening the Company's position, they argued, the influx of
Europeans would actually weaken and imperil it. For the inflowing
Europeans would be commercial adventurers of no breeding or education.
Now the low, when exalted by circumstances, are generally tyrannous, and
the uneducated are incapable of seeing beyond the circle of their own
native prejudices. In India circumstances conspire to exalt every member
of the ruling race, really to some extent as well as in his own
estimation. Nor is there any country in which it is more necessary to
respect and make allowances for unfamiliar prejudices. Wittingly, by
deliberate insult, unwittingly, by failing to allow for foreign
prejudices, the low and uneducated may exasperate a subject people to
whom the dominion of rulers no less foreign and in essentials no less
rapacious and oppressive, but courteous and in small matters tolerant,
seems comparatively unobjectionable. Open India to free European
immigration and you admit into the land the potential causes of racial
hatred and political unrest.

It was thus that the defenders of the Company's monopoly argued,
generations ago. The case was decided against them --- inevitably. It was
impossible to keep India a closed country. But the supporters of lost
causes are not necessarily fools. The opponents of free immigration
exaggerated its dangers. But the briefest visit to India is enough to
convince one that there was much truth in what they said.

At the Jodhpur Dak Bungalow, to which, the Guest House being full, we
had been relegated, I was reminded, as I had often been reminded before,
of their warnings. The reminder was more forcible than usual, since the
person who reminded me was more frightfully typical of the class it was
desired to exclude than any one I had hitherto met. He was ill-bred and
totally uncultured; prosperous, having evidently come up in the world,
and in consequence bumptious and hectoring with all the vulgar insolence
of the low man exalted and anxious to remind other people and himself of
his newly acquired importance. Towards his fellow Europeans the man's
inferiority complex expressed itself in boastings; but where the Indians
were concerned, it found vent, towards the poor, in bullying, towards
those who looked rich enough to be able to claim the protection of the
law, in insult and rudeness. Uneducated, the manifest descendant of pork
butchers and publicans, he felt himself immeasurably superior to every
inhabitant of the peninsula, from the Rajput prince to the _pandit_ and
the Europeanised doctor of science. He was a white man --- "one of the
whitest men unhung."

In the course of some thousands of miles of travelling in Upper India,
involving many halts at station restaurants and Dak Bungalows, it was
our misfortune to meet a good many men of this type. The Jodhpur
specimen was certainly the worst, but all were bad. And all belonged to
the lower orders of the unofficial, trading community.

The official class in India is composed of men of decent family,
decently brought up and, as education goes, well-educated. They are
consequently tolerant and well-behaved. For the educated man is capable
of looking at things from other points of view than his own. And one who
has been brought up in the ruling classes of society is generally
courteous, not because he does not feel himself superior to other
people, but precisely because his sense of superiority is so great that
he feels that he owes it to his inferiors to be civil to them as a
slight compensation for their manifest inferiority. In social
intercourse it is the acts that count, not the motives behind them. The
courtesy of a duke or of a royal personage charms us, and we do not
reflect that it is due to a contempt for ourselves far more crushing
than that which the parvenu offensively expresses for his menials and
tradesmen. The blustering rudeness of the parvenu is an admission of the
precariousness of his superiority. The prince is so contemptuously
certain of his, that he can afford to be civil. But civility, whatever
its cause, is always civility; and rudeness angers and hurts us, even
when we know it to be the expression of the sense of inferiority. The
official may be courteous only because he is inwardly convinced of his
enormous superiority to the Indians with whom he comes in contact; but
at any rate he is courteous, and courtesy never offends. Indians may
regard the official's rule as an injury to the country; but at least he
refrains, generally speaking, from adding personal insult. Insult comes
mainly from insignificant non-officials; it makes more enemies to
English rule than official injury.

Most Englishmen who live in India will tell you that they love the
Indians. For peasants, for workmen, for _sepoys_, for servants they feel
nothing but a benevolent and fatherly affection. They greatly admire the
orthodox Brahmin who thinks it wrong to cross the seas and whose
learning is all mythology, Sanskrit, and a fabulous kind of history.
Still greater is their admiration for the Rajput noble, that picturesque
survival from the age of chivalry; he rides well, plays a good game of
tennis, and is in every respect a _pukka sahib_ --- that is to say, a
sportsman with good manners, a code of morals not vastly different from
that current at English public schools, and no intellectual
accomplishments or pretensions. The only Indians you find them objecting
to as a class are those who have received a Western education. The
reason is sufficiently obvious. The educated Indian is the Englishman's
rival and would-be supplanter. To the slavish and illiterate masses the
European is manifestly superior. Nor can the _pandit_, entangled in his
orthodoxy and learned only in Sanskrit, the sporting nobleman, learned
in nothing, ever challenge a supremacy which he owes to his Western
training. All these he can afford to love, protectively. But no man
loves another who threatens to deprive him of his privileges and powers.
The educated Indian is not popular with the Europeans. It is only to be
expected.

This dislike of the educated Indian is frequently expressed by the low
European in terms of gross or covert insult. No man likes to be
insulted, even by those whom he despises. Philosophers will wince at the
sarcasms of passing street boys and the unfavourable comments of
critics, infinitely their inferiors, have wounded to the quick the
greatest artists. It is not to be wondered at if men, who are neither
sages nor geniuses and who, moreover, have been brought up in the
humiliating position of members of a subject race, should be quick to
resent insults. The hatred of the educated middle-class --- in India, at
the present time, largely unemployed and consequently embittered --- is a
menace to any government. In the creation of this hatred the worst bred
and least educated of the Europeans have done more than their fair
share.
:::


\clearpage
