\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## AJMERE {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The little grandson of the Indian house, into which a letter of
introduction had admitted us, was a child of about eight or nine,
beautiful with that pure, grave, sensitive beauty, which belongs only to
children. In one of his books, I forget which, Benjamin Kidd has made
some very judicious reflections on the beauty of children. The beauty of
children, he points out, is almost a superhuman beauty. We are like
angels when we are children --- candid, innocently passionate,
disinterestedly intelligent. The angelic qualities of our minds express
themselves in our faces. In youth and earliest maturity we are human;
the angel dies and we are men. Greek art, it is significant, is
preoccupied almost exclusively with youth. As middle age advances, we
become less and less human, increasingly simian. Some remain apelike to
the end. Some, with the fading of the body's energies and appetites,
become for a second time something more than human --- the Ancients of Mr.
Shaw's fable --- personified mind.

***

To see things --- really to see them --- one must use the legs as well as
the eyes. Even a vicarious muscular effort quickens the vision; and a
country that is looked at from horseback or a carriage, is seen almost
as completely and intimately as one through which the spectator has
walked on his own feet.

But there is another kind of sight-seeing, admittedly less adequate than
the first, but in its own peculiar way as delightful: the sight-seeing
that is done in comfort and without the contraction of a muscle from a
rapidly moving machine. Railways first made it possible, to a limited
extent indeed and in somewhat disagreeable conditions. The automobile
has placed the whole world at the mercy of the machine, and has turned
high-speed sight-seeing into a new and genuine pleasure. It is a
pleasure, indeed, which the severe moralist, if he analysed it, if he
were to determine exactly its kind and quality, would class, I am
afraid, among the vicious pleasures; a narcotic, not an energising
pleasure; a pleasure analogous to opium-smoking; that numbs the soul and
lulls it into a passive idleness; a pleasure of sloth and
self-indulgence. I speak as an unrepentant addict to what I must admit
to be a vice. High-speed sight-seeing induces in me a state of being
like that into which one slides, one deliciously melts --- alas, too
rarely and for all too brief a time, at a certain stage of mild
tipsiness. Sitting relaxed in the machine I stare at the slowly shifting
distances, the hurrying fields and trees, the wildly fugitive details of
the immediate hedgerow. Plane before plane, the successive accelerations
merge into a vertiginous counterpoint of movements. In a little while I
am dizzied into a kind of trance. Timelessly in the passivity almost of
sleep, I contemplate a spectacle that has taken on the quality, at once
unreal and vivid, of a dream. At rest I have an illusion of activity.
Profoundly solitary, I sit in the midst of a phantasmagoria. I have
never taken the Indian hemp, but from the depths of my trance of speed I
can divine sympathetically what must be the pleasures of the hashish
smoker, or the eater of bhang.

Much less completely, but satisfyingly enough, the movies have power to
induce in me a similar trance. Shutting my mind to the story I can
concentrate on the disembodied movement of light and shadow on the
screen, until something that at last resembles the delicious hypnotism
of speed descends upon me and I slide into that waking sleep of the
soul, from which it is such a cruel agony to be awakened once again into
time and the necessity of action.

The long days of travelling through Rajputana seemed to me, as I sat
entranced at the window, at once short and eternal. The journeys
occupied only as much time as it took to fall into my trance, to eat
lunch and relapse, to change trains and, once more settled, to relapse
again. The remaining hours did not exist, and yet were longer than
thousands of years. Much passed before my eyes and was seen; but I
cannot pretend that I remember a great deal of what I saw. And when I do
remember, it is not so much in terms of individual objects as of
processes. Innumerable separate images, seen during hours of
contemplation, have blended and run together in my mind, to form a
single unit of memory, just as the different phases of the growth of
plants or the development of caterpillars into butterflies are selected
and brought together by the photographer so as to be seen as a single
brief process in a five-minute cinema film. Shutting my eyes I can
revisualise, for example, the progressive changes in colour, across the
breadth of Rajputana, of the horns of the oxen; how they started by
being painted both green, how the green gradually melted out of one and
became red, how, later, they were both red, then both parti-coloured,
then finally striped like barber's poles in concentric circles of red,
white and green. More vividly still I remember a process connected with
turbans, a gradual development, the individual phases of which must have
been separately observed here and there through hundreds of miles of
country. I remember that they started, near Jodhpur, by being small and
mostly white, that they grew larger and larger and redder and redder
until, at a certain point where they came to a climax, touched an apogee
of grandeur, they were like enormous balloons of dark crimson muslin
with a little brown face peeping almost irrelevantly out of the middle
of each. After that they began to recede again from the top of their
curve. In my memory I see a process of gradual waning, culminating at
Ajmere in a return to the merely normal. The train drew up in the midst
of the most ordinary Indian headwear. I had seen the rise, I had been
the entranced spectator of the decline and fall of the Rajput turban.
And now it was time to alight. Reluctantly, with pain I woke myself, I
turned on lights inside my head, I jumped into spiritual cold baths, and
at length --- clothed, so to speak, and in my right mind --- stepped out of
my warm delicious timelessness into the noise and the grey squalor of
Ajmere Station.
:::


\clearpage
