\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## PUSHKAR LAKE {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The holiest waters in India are mantled with a green and brilliant scum.
Those who would bathe must break it, as hardy swimmers, in our colder
countries, break the ice, before they can reach the spiritually
cleansing liquid. Coming out of the water, bathers leave behind them
jagged rifts of blackness in the green; rifts that gradually close, if
no more pilgrims come down to bathe, till the green skin of the lake is
altogether whole again.

There were but few bathers when we were at Pushkar. The bathing ghats
going down in flights of white steps to the water were almost deserted
and the hundred temples all but empty. We were able to walk easily and
undisturbed along the little stone embankments connecting ghat with
ghat. Here and there, on the lowest steps, a half-naked man squatted,
methodically wetting himself with the scummy water, a woman, always
chastely dressed, methodically soaked her clothes. On days of little
concourse the bathers do not venture far out into the lake. Death lurks
invisible under the green scum, swims noiselessly inshore, snaps, drags
down. We saw him basking on a little shrine-crowned island a hundred
yards from land, monstrous and scaly, grinning even in his sleep --- a
crocodile. Pushkar is so holy that no life may be taken within its
waters or on its banks, not even the man-eater's. A dozen pilgrims
disappear each year between those enormous jaws. It is considered lucky
to be eaten by a crocodile at Pushkar.

Behind the ghats rises a charming architecture of temples and priestly
houses and serais for the pilgrims --- all white, with little domes
against the sky, and balconies flowering out of high blank walls, and
windows of lattice-work, and tunnelled archways giving a glimpse,
through shadow, of sunlight beyond. Nothing very old, nothing very
grand; but all exceedingly pretty, with a certain look of the Italian
Riviera about it. Italian, too, are the innumerable shrines --- in little
niches, in ornamental sentry-boxes of stucco, under domed canopies of
stone-work. Looking into them, I almost expected to see a mouldering
plaster Crucifixion, and Annunciation in painted terra-cotta, a
blue-robed Madonna with her Child. And it came each time as something of
a shock to discover among the sacred shadows of the shrine a rough-hewn
cow of marble or red sandstone, kneeling reverently before a bi-sexual
phallic symbol and gazing at it with an expression on its ingenuously
sculptured face of rapt ecstatic adoration.
:::


\clearpage
