\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## CHITOR {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The fort of Chitor is larger than that of Jodhpur and therefore less
spectacular. The Jodhpur fort is perched on the summit of what is almost
a crag. The hill on which Chitor is built is probably as high, but it
seems much lower, owing to its great length; it is a ridge, not a
pinnacle of rock. And the buildings, which, at Jodhpur, are crowded into
a single imposing pile, are scattered at wide intervals over the space
enclosed within the circuit of the walls of Chitor. Jodhpur is wildly
picturesque, like something out of a DorÃ© picture-book. Examined at
close quarters, however, it is not particularly interesting. From a
distance, Chitor is less imposing; but climb up to it, and you will find
it full of magnificent buildings --- temples among the finest in Upper
India, great ruined palaces, towers fantastically carved from base to
summit. None of these buildings is much more than five hundred years
old; but time has dealt hardly with them. The soft stone of which they
are built has crumbled away under the rain and sun and wind. The sharp
edges have become blunt, the innumerable sculptures are blurred and
defaced. The splendours of Hindu art are only dimly seen, as though
through an intervening mist, or with myopic and unspectacled eyes.

***

Decoration is costly nowadays and money scarce. Making a virtue of
economic necessity, we have proclaimed the beauty of unadorned
simplicity in art. In architecture, for example, we mistrust all "fussy
details," and can admire only the fundamental solid geometry of a
building. We like our furniture plain, our silver unchased, our stage
scenery flat and unconventional. Our tastes will change, no doubt, when
our purses grow longer. Meanwhile, simplicity is regarded as an almost
necessary quality of good art.

But the facts are against us. The best art has not been always and
necessarily the simplest. Profusion of decorative detail need not
obscure the main lines of the composition considered as a whole. Those
who require a more convincing proof of these statements than can be
found at home, should come to India. They will find in the best
specimens of Hindu architecture an unparalleled extravagance of
decorative details, entirely subordinated to the main architectural
design. It would be difficult to find on the walls of the Chitor temples
a single blank square foot. But so far from distracting the attention
from the architectural composition, the sculpture and the ornament serve
to emphasise the characteristic forms and movements of the strange
design. If the sculpture at Chitor is unsatisfactory that is due, not to
its elaborateness and profusion, but to its poor intrinsic quality. It
is all fairly good, but none of it is first-rate. The innumerable
carvings at Chitor are the product of a great anonymous labour. No great
original artist stands out from among the craftsmen. It is all nameless,
unindividual.

***

A visit to India makes one realise how fortunate, so far at any rate as
the arts are concerned, our Europe has been in its religions. The
Olympian religion of antiquity and, except occasionally, the
Christianity which took its place, were both favourable to the
production of works of art, and the art which they favoured was, on the
whole, a singularly reasonable and decent kind of art. Neither paganism
no Christianity imposed restrictions on what the artist might represent;
nor did either demand of him that he should try to represent the
unrepresentable. The Olympian deities were men made gods; the Saviour of
the Christians was God made man. An artist could work to the greater
glory of Zeus or of Jesus without ever going beyond the boundaries of
real and actual human life.

How different is the state of things in India. Here, one of the two
predominant religions forbids absolutely the representation of the human
form and even, where Muslim orthodoxy is strict, of any living animal
form whatever. It is only occasionally and then in purely secular art
and on the smallest of scales that this religious injunction is
disobeyed. Mohammedan art tends, in consequence, to be dry, empty,
barren, and monotonous.

Hinduism, on the other hand, permits the representation of things human,
but adds that the human is not enough. It tells the artist that it is
his business to express symbolically the superhuman, the spiritual, the
pure metaphysical idea. The best is always the enemy of the good, and by
trying to improve on sober human reality, the Hindus have evolved a
system of art full of metaphysical monsters and grotesques that are none
the less extravagant for being symbolical of the highest of "high"
philosophies. (Too high, I may add parenthetically, for my taste.
Philosophies, like pheasants, can be hung too long. Most of our highest
systems have been pendant for at least two thousand years. I am plebeian
enough to prefer my spiritual nourishment fresh. But let us return to
Hindu art.)

Readers of the *Bhagavad Gita* will remember the passage in the Eleventh
Discourse, where Krishna reveals himself to Arjuna in a form hitherto
unbeheld by mortal eyes :---

> "With mouths, eyes, arms, breasts multitudinous ...
>
> Long-armed, with thighs and feet innumerable,
>
> Vast-bosomed, set with many fearful teeth. ...".

And further: "With many divine ornaments, with many upraised divine
weapons, wearing divine necklaces and vestures, anointed with divine unguents,
the God all-marvellous, boundless, with face turned every way."
And so on. The catalogue of Krishna's members, features and wardrobe
covers several pages of Mrs. Besant's translation of the *Gita*. We
recognise the necessarily inadequate embodiment of the description in
innumerable Indian statues and paintings. And what is the significance
of these grotesque and repulsive monsters? Krishna himself explains it.
"Here to-day," he says to Arjuna, "behold the whole universe, movable
and immovable, standing in one in my body." These many-limbed monsters
are symbolic, then, of the cosmos. They are the One made manifest, the
All in a nutshell. Hindu artists are trying to express in terms of form
what can only be expressed --- and not very clearly at that, for it is
difficult to speak lucidly about things of which one knows nothing --- in
words. The Hindus are too much interested in metaphysics and ultimate
Reality to make good artists. Art is not the discovery of
Reality --- whatever Reality may be, and no human being can possibly know.
It is the organisation of chaotic appearance into an orderly and human
universe.
:::


\clearpage
