\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## UDAIPUR {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
By some slight error in the original introduction which made us state
guests in the various capitals of Rajputana, I found myself credited,
during several weeks of my tour, with the title of Professor. It was in
vain that I tried to disabuse Guest Officers and Secretaries of State. I
was not a professor; there were others of the same name. ... And so on.
My denials were put down to an excessive modesty. Professor I remained
to the last. In the end I thought it best to accept the title which had
been thrust upon me. My Indian hosts preferred me to be professor; I
felt that I could not disoblige them.

Among the Indians of the older generation and in the more old-fashioned
parts of the country there is a great respect for learning as such. The
scholar is more highly esteemed than the artist. As a professor I found
I cut more ice than as a mere writer of fiction.

The position was the same in Europe, three hundred years ago. To their
contemporaries, Salmasius seemed a far greater man than Milton. At the
time when they came into controversy Milton was a mere minor poet, the
author of a few vernacular pieces, such as *Lycidas* and *Comus*,
and --- more important in the eyes of the discerning seventeenth century
public --- of a number of elegant Latin verses. Salmasius, on the other
hand, was the most learned man of his age. His commentary on Orosius was
a vast mountain of mixed rubbish raked out of the recesses of
innumerable libraries. He had read ten times as many books as any other
man of his age; he was therefore ten times as great. Whether he had
profited by his reading nobody inquired. Indeed, in an age respectful of
authority, it matters not whether a man profits by his reading or
remains throughout his life a learned ass. What is important in such an
age is the learning as such. In an age of authority originality is not
valued so highly as the capacity to repeat, parrot-like, the sayings of
the illustrious dead --- even of the unillustrious; the important thing is
that they should be dead.

India is a country where tradition is strong and authority, at any rate
among the men of the older generation, is still profoundly respected.
Similar causes produce similar effects, and one can find in India to-day
the kind of scholarship that flourished in Europe up to the end of the
seventeenth century, together with a complementary scholar-respecting
public opinion. I had occasion to meet several extremely learned men,
whose attitude towards the ancient Sanskrit literature, which was the
object of their studies, was the attitude of a scholastic towards
classical and medi√¶val Latin. For scholars of this type every statement
made by the ancients is true and must be accepted without criticism.
Galileo's unequal weights may fall from the Leaning Tower in equal
times. Nevertheless bodies must fall with a speed proportional to their
weight, because Aristotle says so; and Aristotle must not be criticised
or called in question. That was the attitude towards authority in
seventeenth century Europe. And that is still the attitude in India. You
still meet in India men of culture who accept unquestioningly anything
that is written in an ancient book. Thus, in the ancient mythological
poems of India there are certain descriptions of flying boats and
chariots. Similar references to flying are to be found in almost every
mythology or body of fairy tales; but it does not occur to us to take
them seriously as accounts of actual fact. We do not claim, for example,
that Icarus anticipated Wilbur Wright. But in India, on the other hand,
these descriptions are accepted at their face value, and I have met
several intelligent and cultured men (one of them was even a scholar of
some eminence) who have solemnly assured me that Zeppelins were in
common use among the ancient Hindus, and that the Lord Krishna was in
the habit of flying by airship to America and back.

It is obvious that, in a society where such worshippers of ancient
authority still exist, it is much more respectable to be a learned than
an original man, a scholar than an artist. I accepted my temporary
professorship and figuratively enthroned on the Chair of some
unspecified science --- for fortunately I was never pressed too closely
about my subject --- I carried my borrowed title with dignity and even
with splendour across the kingdoms of Rajputana.
:::


\clearpage
