\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## CAWNPORE {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Personally I have little use for political speaking. If I know something
about the question at issue, I find it quite unnecessary to listen to an
orator who repeats in a summarised, and generally garbled, form the
information I already possess; knowing what I do, I am quite capable of
making up my own mind on the subject under discussion without listening
to his rhetorical persuasions. If, on the other hand, I know nothing, it
is not to the public speaker that I turn for the information on which to
base my judgment. The acquisition of full and accurate knowledge about
any given subject is a lengthy and generally boring process, entailing
the reading of many books, the collating of numerous opinions. It
therefore follows, inevitably, that the imparting of knowledge can never
be part of a public speaker's work, for the simple reason that if his
speeches are boring and lengthy --- and boring and lengthy they must be,
if he is to give anything like a fair and full account of the
facts --- nobody will listen to him. Now it happens that I have a
prejudice in favour of information. I like to know what I am doing and
why. Hence, when I am ignorant, I go to the library, not to the public
meeting. In the library, I know, I shall be able to collect enough facts
to permit me to form an opinion of my own. At the public meeting, on the
other hand, the speaker will give me only a garbled selection of the
available facts, and will devote the bulk of his time and energies to
persuading me by means of rhetoric to adopt his opinions. Political
speaking is thus of no use to me. Either I know enough about the point
at issue to make the oratory of politicians entirely superfluous; or
else I know so little that their oratory is apt to be misleading and
dangerous. In the first case I am in a position to make up my own mind;
in the second I am not, and I do not desire to have my mind made up for
me.

The All India Congress at Cawnpore lasted for three days, and in the
course of those three days I listened to more political speeches than I
had previously listened to in all the years of my life. Many of them
were in Hindi and therefore, to me, incomprehensible. Of the speeches in
English most were eloquent; but for the reasons I have set out above
they were of little use to me. If the Congress was impressive --- and it
did impress me, profoundly --- it was not by reason of the oratory of the
delegates. Oratory in large quantities is always slightly ridiculous.
Particularly if it is the oratory of people who are not in a postion to
give effect to their words. The English in India are very quick in
seeing this absurdity. Possessing as they do the power to act, they have
no need to talk. It is easy for them to mock the powerless and
disinherited Indians for the luxuriant copiousness of their eloquence.
The Indians themselves are quite aware of the absurdity of so much
oratory. "We talk too much," an old Indian said to me. "But at least
that's doing something. In my young days we didn't even talk." In the
beginning was the word ... Words are creative. In the long run they have
a way of generating actions. But it was not, I repeat, by the oratory
that I was impressed. It was by the orators and by their audience.

Imagine an enormous tent, a hundred yards or more in length by sixty in
width. Looking up, you could see, through the thin brown canvas of its
roof, the shadows of wind-blown flags, and from time to time the passing
silhouette of a kite or slowly soaring vulture. The floor of the tent
and the platform were decently covered with matting, and it was on this
matting --- for there were no chairs --- that the delegates sat, and sat
unflinchingly, I may add, from before noon till long after sunset, six
hours, seven hours and, on the last day, nearly nine. Those nine
foodless hours of squatting on the floor were very nearly my last. By
the time they were over, I was all but dead of sheer fatigue. But the
delegates seemed positively to enjoy every moment of them. Comfort and
regular meals are Western habits, which few, even of the wealthy, have
adopted in the East. The sudden change to discomfort and protracted
starvation is very painful to Western limbs and loins, western hams, and
Western stomachs.

It was a huge crowd. There must have been seven or eight thousand
delegates packed together on the floor of the tent. In the old days, I
was told, it would have been a variegated crowd of many-coloured turbans
and fezes, interspersed with European hats and sun helmets. But now,
since the days of non-co-operation, nobody wears anything but the white
cotton "Gandhi cap." It is an ugly headgear, like a convict's cap. The
wearers of it find the similitude symbolic. All India, they say, is one
great gaol; for its inhabitants the convict's is the only suitable, the
only logical uniform. From our exalted seats on the platform we looked
down over what seemed a great concourse of prisoners.

It was the size of the crowd that first impressed me. Mere quantity is
always impressive. The human observer is small and single. Great
numbers, huge dimensions overawe him into feeling yet more solitary and
minute. In the world of art even ugliness and disproportion can impress
us, if there be but enough of them. The buildings which flank Victoria
Street in London are architecturally monstrous; but they are so high,
and the monotonous stretch of them is so long, that they end by taking
on a certain grandeur. The individuals composing a Derby or Cup Final
crowd may be repulsive both in appearance and character; but the crowd
is none the less a magnificent and impressive thing. But at Cawnpore it
was not only the quantity of humanity assembled within the Congress tent
that impressed; it was its quality too. Looking through the crowd one
was struck by the number of fine, intelligent faces. These faces were
particularly plentiful on and in the neighbourhood of the platform,
where the leaders and the more important of their followers were
assembled. Whenever I remarked a particularly sensitive, intelligent or
powerful face, I would make inquiries regarding its owner. In almost
every case I found he had spent at least six months in gaol for a
political offence. After a little practice, I learned to recognise the
"criminal type" at sight.

***

"Pusillus, persona contemptibilis, vivacis ingenii et oculum habens
perspicacem gratumque, et sponte fluens ei non deerat eloquium." Such is
William of Tyre's description of Peter the Hermit. It would serve
equally well as a description of Mahatma Gandhi.

The saint of popular imagination is a person of majestic carriage, with
a large intellectual forehead, expressive and luminous eyes, and a good
deal of waved hair, preferably of a snowy whiteness. I do not profess to
be very well up in hagiology; but my impression is that the majority of
the saints about whom we know any personal details have not conformed to
this ideal type. They have been more like Peter the Hermit and Mahatma
Gandhi.

The qualities which make a man a saint --- faith, an indomitable will, a
passion for self-sacrifice --- are not those that extrinsicate themselves
in striking bodily stigmata. Men of great intellectual capacities
generally look what they are. Sometimes it happens that these persons
are further possessed of saintly qualities, and then we have the
picturesque saint of popular imagination. But one can be a saint without
possessing those qualities of mind which mould the face of genius into
such striking and unforgettable forms.

Looking through the crowd in the Congress tent the casual observer would
have been struck by the appearance of Mrs. Sarojini Naidu, the President
of the Congress, of Pandit Motilal Nehru, the leader of the Swarajist
Party. These people, he would have said, are somehow intrinsically
important; their faces proclaim it. It is probable that he would never
even have noticed the little man in the dhoti, with the shawl over his
naked shoulders; the emaciated little man with the shaved head, the
large ears, the rather foxy features; the quiet little man, whose
appearance is only remarkable when he laughs --- for he laughs with the
whole-hearted laughter of a child, and his smile has an unexpected and
boyish charm. No, the casual observer would probably never even have
noticed Mahatma Gandhi.

***

In the West we admire a man who fasts in order to break a world's record
or win a wager; we understand his motives and can sympathise with them.
But the man who goes out for forty days into the wilderness (and forty
days, it may be added, are nothing in comparison with modern records),
the man who fasts for the good of his soul has become incomprehensible
to us. We regard him with suspicion and not, as our ancestors would have
done, with reverence. So far from worshipping him, we think that he
ought to be put into an asylum. With us, the ascetic, the mortifier of
the flesh for the sake of the "spirit," the self-tormentor, has ceased
to command respect. We still admire the saint who gives up wealth and
worldly advantage for the sake of an idea. But we demand that his
sacrifice shall not be too excessive, at any rate in appearance. We
deplore such visible symptoms of sainthood as the hair shirt. We do not
like a saint to sacrifice, along with his money and his worldly success,
his clothes, his comfort, his family ties, his marriage-bed.

In India things are different. Amongst the Hindus the enthusiasm for
sainthood, even in its extremest manifestations, is as strong as it was
among the Christians of the first centuries. Eloquence and energy and
what is called personal magnetism are enough amongst us to make a man a
successful leader of the people. But to capture the imagination of the
Indian masses a man must possess, besides these qualities, the
characteristics of a saint. A Disraeli can captivate the hearts of the
English; he could have no sort of popular success in India. In India the
most influential popular leader of modern times is Gandhi, who is a
saint and an ascetic, not a politician at all. Sanctity and political
astuteness are rarely combined. Gandhi's saintliness gave him power over
the people; but he lacked the political ability to use that power to the
best advantage.

***

Edward lear has a rhyme about

> an old man of Thermopylae,
>
> Who never did anything properly.

To the Westerner all Indians seem old men of Thermopylae. In the
ordinary affairs of life, I am a bit of a Thermopylean myself. But even
I am puzzled, disquieted, and rather exasperated by the Indians. To a
thoroughly neat-minded and efficient man, with a taste for tidiness and
strong views about respectability, and the keeping up of appearances,
Indians must be literally maddening.

It would be possible to compile a long and varied lists of what I may
call Indian Thermopylisms. But I prefer to confine my attention to the
Thermopylean behaviour of Indians in a single sphere of activity --- that
of ceremonial. For it is, I think, in matters of ceremonial and the
keeping up of appearances that Indians most conspicuously fail, in our
Western opinion, "to do anything properly." Nobody who has looked into a
temple, or witnessed the ceremonies of an Indian marriage can fail to
have been struck by the extraordinary "sloppiness" and inefficiency of
the symbolical performances. The sublime is constantly alternated with
the ridiculous and trivial, and the most monstrous incongruities are
freely mingled. The old man of Thermopylae is as busy in the palace as
in the temple; and the abodes of Indian potentates are an incredible
mixture of the magnificent and the cheap, the grandiose and the
ludicrously homely. Cows bask on the front steps; the anteroom is filthy
with the droppings of pigeons; beggars doze under the gates, or search
one another's heads for lice; in one of the inner courts fifty
courtesans from the city are singing interminable songs in honour of the
birth of the _Maharaja_'s eleventh grandchild; in the throne room, nobody
quite knows why, there stands a brass bedstead with a sham mahogany
wardrobe from the Tottenham Court Road beside it; framed colour prints
from the Christmas number of the *Graphic* of 1907 alternate along the
walls with the most exquisite Rajput and Persian miniatures; in the
unswept jewel room, five million pounds worth of precious stones lies
indiscriminately heaped; the paintings are peeling off the walls of the
private apartments, a leprosy has attacked the stucco, there is a hole
in the carpet; the marble hall of audience is furnished with bamboo
chairs, and the Rolls-Royces are driven by ragged chauffeurs who blow
their noses on the long and wind-blown end of their turbans. As an
Englishman belonging to that impecunious but dignified section of the
upper middle-class which is in the habit of putting on dress clothes to
eat --- with the most studied decorum and out of porcelain and burnished
silver --- a dinner of dishwater and codfish, mock duck and cabbage, I was
always amazed, I was pained and shocked by this failure on the part of
Eastern monarchs to keep up appearances, and do what is owing to their
position.

I was even more helplessly bewildered by the Thermopylean behaviour of
the delegates at the Cawnpore Congress during Mr. Gandhi's speech on the
position of Indians in South Africa. The applause when he ascended the
rostrum was loud --- though rather less loud than a Western observer might
have expected. Indian audiences are not much given to yelling or
hand-clapping and it is not possible when one is sitting on the floor,
to stamp one's feet. But though the noise was small, the enthusiasm was
evidently very great. And yet, when the Mahatma began to speak, there
was more talking and fidgetting, more general inattention than during
any other speech of the day. True, it was late in the afternoon when Mr.
Gandhi made his speech. The delegates had spent a long and hungry day
sitting on a floor that certainly grew no softer with the passage of the
hours. There was every reason for their feeling the need to relax their
minds and stretch their cramped legs. But however acute its weariness
had become, a Western audience would surely have postponed the moment of
relaxation until the great man had finished speaking. Even if it had
found the speech boring, it would have felt itself bound to listen
silently and with attention to a great and admired national hero. It
would have considered that chattering and fidgetting were signs of
disrespect. Not so, evidently, the Indian audience. To show disrespect
for the Mahatma was probably the last thing in the world that the
Cawnpore delegates desired. Nevertheless they talked all through the
speech, they stretched their stiff legs, they called for water, they
went out for little strolls in the Congress grounds and came back,
noisily. Knowing how Englishmen could comport themselves during a speech
by a national hero, combining in his single person the sanctity of the
Archbishop of Canterbury with the popularity of the Prince of Wales, I
was astonished, I was profoundly puzzled.

In an earlier entry in this diary I attributed the Thermopylism of the
Indians to a certain emotional agility (shared, to some extent, by the
natives of Southern Europe), to a capacity for feeling two things at
once or, at least, in very rapid succession. Indians and Neapolitans, I
pointed out, can reverence their gods even while spitting, jesting, and
picking their noses. But this explanation does not go far enough; it
requires itself to be explained. How is it that, while we are brought up
to practise consistency of behaviour, the children of other races are
educated so as to be emotionally agile? Why are we so carefully taught
to keep up the appearances which to others seem so negligible?

Reflecting on my observations in Italy and in India, I am led to believe
that these questions must be answered in one way for the Southern
Europeans, in another for the Indians. The emotional agility of the
Italians is due to the profound "realism" of their outlook, coupled with
their ingrained habit of judging things in terms of æsthetics. Thus, the
Southern European may admire a religious service or a royal procession
as works of art, while holding strong atheistical and anti-monarchical
opinions; he will be able to mock and to admire simultaneously. And
perhaps he is not an atheist or a republican at all. But however
ardently a Christian or a monarchist, he will always find himself able
to reflect --- while he kneels before the elevated Host or cheers the
royal barouche --- that the priest and the king make a very good thing out
of their business, and that they are, after all, only human, like
himself --- probably all too human. As for the shabbinesses and
absurdities of the performance, he will ignore them in his appreciation
of the grandiose intention, the artistic general effect. And he will
regard the Northerner who wants the performance to be perfect in every
detail as a laborious and unimaginative fool. Nor will he understand the
Northerner's passion for keeping up appearances in ordinary daily life.
The Southerner has a liking for display; but his display is different
from ours. When we go in for keeping up appearances, we do the job, not
showily, but thoroughly, and at every point. We want all the rooms in
our house to look "nice," we want everything in it to be "good"; we
train our servants to behave as nearly as possible like automatons, and
we put on special clothes to eat even the worst of dinners. The
Southerner, on the other hand, concentrates his display into a single
splendid flourish. He likes to get something spectacular for his money
and his aim is to achieve, not respectability, but a work of art. He
gives his house a splendid façade, trusting that every lover of the
grandiose will be content to contemplate the marble front, without
peering too closely at the brick and rubble behind. He will furnish one
drawing-room in style, for state occasions. To keep up appearances at
every point --- for oneself and one's servants, as well as for the outside
world --- seems to him a folly and a waste of spirit. Life is meant to be
enjoyed, and occasional grandiosities are part of the fun. But on
ordinary days of the week it is best enjoyed in shirt sleeves.

The Indian's Thermopylisms are due, it seems to me, to entirely
different causes. He is careless about keeping up appearances, because
appearances seem to him as nothing in comparison with "spiritual
reality." He is slack in the performance of anything in the nature of
symbolic ceremonial, because the invisible thing symbolised seems to him
so much more important than the symbol. He is a Thermopylean, not
through excess of "realism" and the æsthetic sense, but through excess
of "spirituality." Thus the _Maharaja_ does not trouble to make his
surroundings look princely, because he feels that princeliness lies
within him, not without. Marriages are made in heaven; therefore it is
unnecessary to take trouble about mere marriage ceremonies on earth. And
if the soul of every Indian is overflowing with love and respect for
Mahatma Gandhi, why should Congress delegates trouble to give that
respect the merely physical form of silence and motionlessness ?

Such arguments, of course, are never consciously put. But the training
of Indians is such that they act as though in obedience to them. They
have been taught that this present world is more or less illusory, that
the aim of every man should be to break out of the cycle of recurrent
birth, that the "soul" is everything and that the highest values are
purely "spiritual." Owing to their early inculcation, such beliefs have
tended to become almost instinctive, even in the minds of those whose
consciously formulated philosophy of life is of an entirely different
character. It is obvious that people holding such beliefs will attach
the smallest importance to the keeping up of appearances.

In these matters we Northerners behave like Behaviourists --- as though
the visible or audible expression of an idea were the idea itself, as
though the symbol in some sort created the notion symbolised. Our
religious rites, our acts of "natural piety" are solemnly performed, and
with an almost military precision. The impressive service, we have
found, actually manufactures God; the memorial ceremony creates and
conserves our interest in the dead. Our royal pageantry is no less rich,
no less consistently effective; for the pageant is the king. Our judges
are wigged and magnificently robed. Absurd survival! But no; the majesty
of the law consists in the wigs and the ermine. Then gentry keeps up
appearances to the limit of its financial means and beyond. It is a
folly, protests the believer in "spiritual" realities. On the contrary,
it is profound wisdom, based on the instinctive recognition of a great
historical truth. History shows us that there were rites before there
were dogmas, that there were conventions of behaviour before there was
morality. Dogmas, indeed, have often been the children of
rites --- systems of thought called into existence to explain gestures.
Morality is the theory of preexisting social habits. (In the same way
some of the greatest advances in mathematics have been due to the
invention of symbols, which it afterwards became necessary to explain;
from the minus sign proceeded the whole theory of negative quantities.)
To sceptics desirous of believing, catholic directors of conscience
prescribe the outward and visible practice of religion; practice, they
know, brings forth faith; the formal appearance of religion creates its
"spiritual" essence. It is the same with civilisation; men who practise
the conventional ritual of civilisation become civilised. Appearing to
be civilised, they really are so. For civilisation is nothing but a
series of conventions; being civilised is obeying those conventions, is
keeping up the appearances of culture, prosperity, and good manners. The
more widely and the more efficiently such appearances are kept up, the
better the civilisation. There can never be a civilisation that ignores
appearances and is wholly "spiritual.". A civilisation based on Quaker
principles could not come into existence; Quakerism in all its forms is
the product, by reaction, of a civilisation already highly developed.
Before one can ignore appearances and conventions, there must be, it is
obvious, conventions and appearances to ignore. The Simple Life is
simple only in comparison with some existing life of complicated
convention. If Quaker principles ceased to be the luxury of a refined
few, and were accepted by the world at large, civilisation would soon
cease to exist: freed from the necessity of keeping up the appearance of
being civilised, the majority of human beings would rapidly become
barbarous.

Admirers of India are unanimous in praising Hindu "spirituality." I
cannot agree with them. To my mind "spirituality" (ultimately, I
suppose, the product of the climate) is the primal curse of India and
the cause of all her misfortunes. It is this preoccupation with
"spiritual" realities, different from the actual historical realities of
common life, that has kept millions upon millions of men and women
content, through centuries, with a lot unworthy of human beings. A
little less spirituality, and the Indians would now be free --- free from
foreign dominion and from the tyranny of their own prejudices and
traditions. There would be less dirt and more food. There would be fewer
Maharajas with Rolls-Royces and more schools. The women would be out of
their prisons, and there would be some kind of polite and conventional
social life --- one of those despised appearances of civilisation which
are yet the very stuff and essence of civilised existence. At a safe
distance and from the midst of a network of sanitary plumbing, Western
observers, disgusted, not unjustifiably, with their own civilisation,
express their admiration for the "spirituality of the Indians, and for
the immemorial contentment which is the fruit of it. Sometimes, such is
their enthusiasm, this admiration actually survives a visit to India.

It is for its "materialism" that our Western civilisation is generally
blamed. Wrongly, I think. For materialism --- if materialism means a
preoccupation with the actual world in which we live --- is something
wholly admirable. If Western civilisation is unsatisfactory, that is not
because we are interested in the actual world; it is because the
majority of us are interested in such an absurdly small part of it. Our
world is wide, incredibly varied and more fantastic than any product of
the imagination. And yet the lives of the vast majority of men and women
among the Western peoples are narrow, monotonous, and dull. We are not
materialistic enough; that is the trouble. We do not interest ourselves
in a sufficiency of this marvellous world of ours. Travel is cheap and
rapid; the immense accumulations of modern knowledge lie heaped up on
every side. Every man with a little leisure and enough money for railway
tickets, every man, indeed, who knows how to read, has it in his power
to magnify himself, to multiply the ways in which he exists, to make his
life full, significant, and interesting. And yet, for some inexplicable
reason, most of us prefer to spend our leisure and our surplus energies
in elaborately, brainlessly, and expensively murdering time. Our lives
are consequently barren and uninteresting and we are, in general, only
too acutely conscious of the fact. The remedy is more materialism and
not, as false prophets from the East assert, more "spirituality"-more
interest in this world, not in the other. The Other World --- the world of
metaphysics and religion --- can never possibly be as interesting as this
world, and for an obvious reason. The Other World is an invention of the
human fancy and shares the limitations of its creator. This world, on
the other hand, the world of the materialists, is the fantastic and
incredible invention of --- well, not in any case of Mrs. Annie Besant.

***

Some of the speeches were in Hindi, some in English. When a man began in
English, there would be a shout of "Hindi! Hindi!" from the patriots of
Upper India. Those, on the other hand, who began in Hindi would find
themselves interrupted by protests from the Tamil speaking delegates of
the south, who called for English. Pandit Motilal Nehru, the leader of
the Swaraj party, delivered his principal oration in Hindi. When it was
over, an excited man jumped up and complained to the President and the
Congress at large that he had spent upwards of a hundred rupees coming
from somewhere beyond Madras to listen to his leader --- a hundred rupees,
and the leader had spoken in Hindi; he had not understood a single word.
Later in the day, one of his compatriots mounted the rostrum and
retaliated on the north by making a very long and totally
incomprehensible speech in Tamil. The north was furious, naturally.
These are some of the minor complexities of Indian politics.

***

The capitalist, the tax-collector, and the policeman have their places
in every society, whatever its form of government. Men must work for
their living, must pay for being governed and must obey the laws. To the
eye of reason, the privilege of slaving for, paying taxes to and being
put into prison by people of one's own, rather than by people of another
race may seem unimportant and hardly worth the trouble involved in
ejecting alien policemen, tax-gatherers, and employers of labour. But
men do not look at things with the eye of reason, and the Indians are
men.

Whether the Indians are in a position to start governing themselves at
once, whether they would do the job as well as the English, or worse, or
better, I am not able to say. Nor, for that matter, is any one else. We
all have our different theories about the matter; but in politics, as in
science, one untested theory is as good, or as bad, as another. It is
only experimentally that we can discover which out of a number of
alternatives is the best hypothesis. Now the bewildering charm of
politics lies in the fact that you cannot experimentally test the truth
of alternative theories. At any given moment, only one choice can be
made. For example, there were in 1916 certain people who held that it
would be a good thing to make peace at once. There were others who
thought that it would not. One cannot, it is obvious, simultaneously
make peace and war. Our rulers decided in favour of war. The theory of
those who thought that it would be a good thing for the world to make
peace in 1916 was never tested. We know by experiment that it was an
extremely bad thing to go on making war to the bitter end. To have made
a premature peace might have been still worse; on the other hand it
might have been better. It remains a matter of opinion. Nobody can ever
know. There is no science of politics, because there is no such thing as
a political laboratory where experiments can be made.

The truth of the theories about the capacity or incapacity of the
Indians to govern themselves can only be tested experimentally. They are
at present merely the divergent opinions of the interested parties. I
happen not to be an interested party; (for I do not consider that the
mere fact of being, on the one hand, an Englishman and, on the other, a
liberal with prejudices in favour of freedom and self-determination,
makes me directly responsible for either the integrity of the British
Empire or the liberation of the Indian people); it is easy for me to
suspend judgment until the production of proof. But if I were a member
of the I.C.S., or if I held shares in a Calcutta jute mill (I wish I
did), I should believe in all sincerity that British rule had been an
unmixed blessing to India and that the Indians were quite incapable of
governing themselves. And if I were an educated Indian, I should most
certainly have gone to gaol for acting on my belief in the contraries of
these propositions. Moreover, even if, as an Indian, I shared the
Englishman's belief, even if it could somehow be proved that Swaraj
would bring, as its immediate consequences, communal discord, religious
and political wars, the oppression of the lower by the higher castes,
inefficiency and corruption, in a word, general anarchy --- even if this
could be proved, I think I should still go on trying to obtain Swaraj.
There are certain things about which it is not possible, it is not right
to take the reasonable, the utilitarian view.

***

All this political talk, all this political action even --- I begin to
wonder, after eight and a half hours on the floor of the Congress tent,
whether it isn't entirely a waste of time. Political power is the
invariable concomitant of economic power. Be rich, control your
country's finance and industry, and you will find that you have
political leadership thrown in as a casual perquisite.

Indian industries were deliberately discouraged by the East India
Company, which found itself able to make more money by selling English
manufactured goods to the Indians than by selling Indian manufactured
goods to the English. When, after a considerable lapse of time, modern
industrialism began to be introduced into India, it was introduced under
foreign auspices and it is still, along with the Indian banking system,
mainly foreign-owned. The foreigners rule; it is inevitable. But the
All-India Congress goes on talking and acting in terms of politics. One
might as well try to cure headaches by applying corn plasters to the
toes.

***

My prejudices happen to be in favor of democracy, self-determination,
and all the rest of it. But political convictions are generally the
fruit of chance rather than of deliberate choice. If I had been brought
up a little differently, I might, I suppose, have been a Fascist and an
apostle of the most full-blooded imperialism. But when I am honest with
myself, I have to admit that I don't care two pins about political
principles. Provided that it guaranteed my safety and left me in peace
to do my work, I should live just as happily under an alien despotism as
under the British constitution. If, in the past, men have fought for
democracy and made revolutions for the attainment of self-government, it
has generally been because they hoped that these things would lead to
better administration than could be had under despotism and foreign
dominion. Once better government has been obtained, democracy and
self-determination --- as such and in themselves --- cease to interest those
who, a short time before, had passionately fought for them.

***

Serfs, burghers, nobles --- we read about them in our history books; but
we find it difficult to realise what mediæval society was really like.
To understand our European Middle Ages, one should go to India.
Hereditary aristocracies still exist in the West --- exist, but *pour
rire*; they are scarcely more than a joke. It is in India that one
learns what it meant, six hundred years ago, to be a villein, a
merchant, a lord. Aristocracy, there, exists in fact, as well as in
name. Birth counts. You come into the world predestined to superiority
or abjection; it is a kind of social Calvinism. Some are born with
Grace; they are Brahmans or Kshatryas. The rest are damned from the
beginning. Outcasts, peasants, money-lenders, merchants --- the Indian
hell has lower and higher circles; but even the upper circles are only
the attics of the social abyss.

Almost without exception Indian politicians profess democratic
principles. They envisage a popularly governed British dominion,
ultimately a republic. Government by the people, for the people, and so
on. But the majority of the influential ones are members of the highest
castes, hereditary wise men and warriors. Their principles may be
democratic, but their instincts remain profoundly aristocratic.
Transplant a few mediæval cardinals and dukes across the centuries into
modern Europe; you might convince them that democracy was a good thing,
but you could hardly expect them to forget from one day to the next
their prejudices about villeins and burgesses, their conviction of their
own inherent nobility. I have seen high-caste educated Indians treating
their inferiors in a way which to a bourgeois like myself, born in even
so moderately democratic a society as that of England, seemed
unthinkably high-handed. I envied them the sense of assured and
inalienable superiority which enabled them so naturally to play the part
of the mediæval noble.

That the lower caste masses would suffer, at the beginning, in any case,
from a return to Indian autonomy seems almost indubitable. Where the
superiority of the upper classes to the lower is a matter of religious
dogma, you can hardly expect the governing few to be particularly
careful about the rights of the many. It is even something of a heresy
to suppose that they have rights. Any indigenous government under Swaraj
would necessarily be in the nature of a despotic oligarchy --- that is,
until education has spread so widely that another and more democratic
form of government becomes practicable. One can only hope, piously, that
the despotism will be paternal and that the education will spread
quickly.

***

From its advertisements much may be learned of a nation's character and
habits of thought. The following brief anthology of Indian
advertisements is compiled from newspapers, magazines, medical
catalogues, and the like. Several of the most characteristic specimens
are taken from the *Cawnpore Congress Guide*, an official publication
intended for the use of delegates and interested visitors. It is with
one of these appeals to India's most enlightened public that I make a
beginning.

    Beget a son and Be Happy by using the "SON BIRTH PILLS," my special secret Hindu Shastrick preparation, according to directions. Ladies who have given birth to daughters only WILL SURELY HAVE SONS NEXT, and those who have sons MUST HAVE MALE ISSUES ONCE AGAIN by the Grace of God. Fortunate persons desirous of begetting sons are bringing this marvellous Something into use for brightening their dark homes and making their lives worth their living. It is very efficacious and knows no failure. Self praise is no recommendation. Try and be convinced. But if you apply, mentioning this publication, with full history of your case, along with a consultation fee of Rupees Ten (Foreign one guinea) only giving your "Word of Honour" to give me a SUITABLE REWARD (naming the amount) according to your means and position in life, just on the accomplishment of your desire in due course of time, you can have the same Free, ABSOLUTELY FREE. Act immediately, for this FREE OFFER may not remain open indefinitely.

Here are some pleasing Hair-oil advertisements from various sources.

    Dr. __________'s Scented Almond Oil. Best preparation to be used as hair-oil for men who do mental work. The effects of almond oil on brain are known to everybody.

    Jabukusum is a pure vegetable oil, to which medicinal ingredients and the perfume have been added to prevent all affectations (sic) of the hair and the brain.

There are several panaceas on the Indian market. There is, for example,
Sidda Kalpa Makaradhwaja which "is a sure and infallible specific for
all Diseases, and it never fails to effect a satisfactory cure in the
patient, be his ailment whatever it may. Among the various diseases
amenable to its administration, to state a few, are the following
:--- Debility, general or nervous, including Nervous Prostration, due to
whatever cause, Loss of Memory, Giddiness and Insanity ... Asthma and
Consumption, all stomach troubles ... cholera ... all Kidney and Bladder
Troubles ... all Acute and Chronic Venereal Diseases ... Leprosy of all
kinds, White, Black, Red, etc. . . . Rheumatism, Paralysis, Epilepsy ...
Hysteria, Sterility ... and all Fevers, including Malaria, Pneumonia,
Influenza, and such other poisonous ones."

Not a bad medicine, but I prefer the "Infallible Cure for Incurable
Diseases, Habits, and Defects," advertised in the *Cawnpore Guide*. The
announcement runs as follows :---

    I have discovered the natural system of cure for all diseases, habits, defects, failings, etc., without the use of deleterious and pernicious drugs or medicines. Being Scientific, it is absolutely safe, simple, painless, pleasant, rapid, and infallible. Diseases like hysteria, epilepsy, rheumatism, loss of memory, paralysis, insanity and mania : addiction to smoking, opium, drink, etc.; impotence, sterility, adultery, and the like can be radically cured duly by My System. Come to me after every one else has failed to do you good. I guarantee a cure in every case undertaken. Every case needs to be treated on its special merits, and so applicants should furnish me with the complete history of the health of the patient and general occupation from birth, height, measurement over chest or bust, waist and hips, and a photograph with as little dress on as possible, along with the consultation fee of Rupees Five, without which no replies can be sent.

If the buying of a postal order were not so insuperable a nuisance, I
should send five rupees to get the details of the adultery cure. So much
cheaper than divorce.

The following are characteristic of a large class of Indian
advertisements:---

    WONDERFUL WORK!!!

    Works wonders in the earthly pleasure.

    MARAD MITRA LAPE

    Will make you a man in one day.

    MARAD MITRA YAKUTI

    Renews all you lost vigour and enables you to enjoy the pleasure with increased delights. Try once.

    1 Bottle Rs. 10. 1/2 Bottle Rs. 5.

    FREE! FREE!!

    Do you want "Secret of Happiness from Conjugal Encounter" and "Good Luck"? If so, apply for the illustrated literature to ________

The enormous number of such advertisements testifies to the disastrous
effect on Indian manhood of the system of child marriages. The effects,
as Gandhi has pointed out in his autobiography, would probably be still
worse, if it were not for the fact that Hindu girl wives generally spend
at least half the year with their own parents, away from their schoolboy
husbands.

The testimonials of Indian sufferers relieved by patent medicines are
generally of a most lyrical character and the oddity of the English in
which they are written gives them an added charm. Here is one from an
Indian Christian :---

    I can say really the medicine is sent by Lord Jesus Christ to the sinful world to save the poor victims from their dreadful diseases. In my 8 years' experience in medical line I have come cross many preparations of medicine, but I have not seen such a wonderful medicine as ________ Please send 10 phials more.

Another pious gentleman writes :---

    I am living to see that I am what I am by the wonderful cure these pills wrought in me by the Grace of God, who I think has put the wisdom of preparing such pills into the head of our Venerable Pundit ________

Another has "no hesitation in recommending it to the suffering
humanity."

Yet another writes as follows:---

    Several of my friends and myself have been using your ________ for over four months for Influenza, Lumbago, Dyspepsia, Syphilis, Rheumatism and Nervous Debility with complete success. There has not been a case in which it failed. I will call it an Ambrosia.

The classical allusion is elegant and apt. One is not surprised to find
that the author of the testimonial is a Bachelor of Arts.

***

One of the evil results of the political subjection of one people by
another is that it tends to make the subject nation unnecessarily and
excessively conscious of its past. Its achievements in the old great
days of freedom are remembered, counted over and exaggerated by a
generation of slaves, anxious to convince the world and themselves that
they are as good as their masters. Slaves cannot talk of their present
greatness, because it does not exist; and prophetic visions of the
future are necessarily vague and unsatisfying. There remains the past.
Out of the scattered and isolated facts of history it is possible to
build up Utopias and Cloud Cuckoo Lands as variously fantastic as the
New Jerusalems of prophecy. It is to the past --- the gorgeous imaginary
past of those whose present is inglorious, sordid, and humiliating --- it
is to the delightful founded-on-fact romances of history that subject
peoples invariably turn. Thus, the savage and hairy chieftains of
Ireland became in due course "the Great Kings of Leinster," "the mighty
Emperors of Meath." Through centuries of slavery the Serbs remembered
and idealised the heroes of Kossovo. And for the oppressed Poles, the
mediæval Polish empire was much more powerful, splendid, and polite than
the Roman. The English have never been an oppressed nationality; they
are in consequence most healthily unaware of their history. They live
wholly in the much more interesting worlds of the present --- in the
worlds of politics and science, of business and industry. So fully,
indeed, do they live in the present, that they have compelled the
Indians, like the Irish at the other end of the world, to turn to the
past. In the course of the last thirty or forty years a huge
pseudo-historical literature has sprung up in India, the melancholy
product of a subject people's inferiority complex. Industrious and
intelligent men have wasted their time and their abilities in trying to
prove that the ancient Hindus were superior to every other people in
every activity of life. Thus, each time the West has announced a new
scientific discovery, misguided scholars have ransacked Sanskrit
literature to find a phrase that might be interpreted as a Hindu
anticipation of it. A sentence of a dozen words, obscure even to the
most accomplished Sanskrit scholars, is triumphantly quoted to prove
that the ancient Hindus were familiar with the chemical constitution of
water. Another, no less brief, is held up as the proof that they
anticipated Pasteur in the discovery of the microbic origin of disease.
A passage from the mythological poem of the Mahabharata proves that they
had invented the Zeppelin. Remarkable people, these old Hindus. They
knew everything that we know or, indeed, are likely to discover, at any
rate until India is a free country; but they were unfortunately too
modest to state the fact baldly and in so many words. A little more
clarity on their part, a little less reticence, and India would now be
centuries ahead of her Western rivals. But they preferred to be oracular
and telegraphically brief. It is only after the upstart West has
repeated their discoveries that the modern Indian commentator upon their
works can interpret their dark sayings as anticipations. On contemporary
Indian scholars the pastime of discovering and creating these
anticipations never seems to pall. Such are the melancholy and futile
occupations of intelligent men who have the misfortune to belong to a
subject race. Free men would never dream of wasting their time and wit
upon such vanities. From those who have not shall be taken away even
that which they have.
:::


\clearpage
