\clearpage
## BENARES, January 14, 1926

It was said that the eclipse of the sun would be visible from Benares.
But it needed more than smoked glass to see it; the eye of faith was
also indispensable. That, alas, we did not possess. Partial to the point
of being non-existent, the eclipse remained, for us at least, unseen.
Not that we minded. For it was not to look at the moon's silhouette that
we had rowed out that morning on the Ganges; it was to look at the
Hindus looking at it. The spectacle was vastly more extraordinary.

There was, at the lowest estimate, a million of them on the bathing
ghats that morning. A million. All the previous night and day they had
been streaming into the town. We had met them on every road, trudging
with bare feet through the dust, an endless and silent procession. In
bundles balanced on their heads they carried provisions and cooking
utensils and dried dung for fuel, with the new clothes which it is
incumbent on pious Hindus to put on, after their bath in honour of the
eclipsed sun. Many had come far. The old men leaned wearily on their
bamboo staves. Their children astride of their hips, the burdens on
their heads automatically balanced, the women walked in a trance of
fatigue. Here and there we would see a little troop that had sat down to
rest --- casually, as is the way of Indians, in the dust of the road and
almost under the wheels of the passing vehicles.

And now the day and the hour had come. The serpent was about to swallow
the sun. (It was about to swallow him in Sumatra, at any rate. At
Benares it would do no more than nibble imperceptibly at the edge of his
disk. The serpent, should one say, was going to try to swallow the sun.)
A million of men and women had come together at Benares to assist the
Light of Heaven against his enemy.

The ghats go down in furlong-wide flights of steps to the river, which
lies like a long arena at the foot of enormous tiers of seats. The tiers
were thronged to-day. Floating on the Ganges, we looked up at acres upon
sloping acres of humanity.

On the smaller and comparatively unsacred ghats the crowd was a little
less densely packed than on the holiest steps. It was at one of these
less crowded ghats that we witnessed the embarkation on the sacred river
of a princess. Canopied and curtained with glittering cloth of gold, a
palanquin came staggering down through the crowd on the shoulders of six
red-liveried attendants. A great barge, like a Noah's ark, its windows
hung with scarlet curtains, floated at the water's edge. The majordomo
shouted and shoved and hit out with his rod of office; a way was somehow
cleared. Slowly and with frightful lurchings, the palanquin descended.
It was set down, and in the twinkling of an eye a little passage way of
canvas had been erected between the litter and the door of the barge.
There was a heaving of the cloth of gold, a flapping of the canvas; the
lady --- the ladies, for there were several of them in the litter --- had
entered the barge unobserved by any vulgar eye. Which did not prevent
them, a few minutes later when the barge had been pushed out into
mid-stream, from lifting the scarlet curtains and peering out with naked
faces and unabashed curiosity at the passing boats and our inquisitive
camera. Poor princesses! They could not bathe with their plebeian and
unimprisoned sisters in the open Ganges. Their dip was to be in the
barge's bilge water. The sacred stream is filthy enough under the sky.
What must it be like after stagnating in darkness at the bottom of an
ancient barge?

We rowed on towards the burning ghats. Stretched out on their neat
little oblong pyres, two or three corpses were slowly smouldering. They
lay on burning faggots, they were covered by them. Gruesomely and
grotesquely, their bare feet projected, like the feet of those who sleep
uneasily on a bed too short and under exiguous blankets.

A little further on we saw a row of holy men, sitting like cormorants on
a narrow ledge of masonry just above the water. Cross-legged, their
hands dropped limply, palm upwards, on the ground beside them, they
contemplated the brown and sweating tips of their noses. It was the Lord
Krishna himself who, in the *Bhagavad Gita*, prescribed that mystic
squint. Lord Krishna, it is evident, knew all that there is to be known
about the art of self-hypnotism. His simple method has never been
improved on; it puts the mystical ecstasy *à la portée de tous*. The
noise of an assembled million filled the air; but no sound could break
the meditative sleep of the nose-gazers.

At a given moment the eye of faith must have observed the nibblings of
the demoniacal serpent. For suddenly and simultaneously all those on the
lowest steps of the ghats threw themselves into the water and began to
wash and gargle, to say their prayers and blow their noses, to spit and
drink. A numerous band of police abbreviated their devotions and their
bath in the interest of the crowds behind. The front of the waiting
queue was a thousand yards wide; but a million people were waiting. The
bathing must have gone on uninterruptedly the whole day.

Time passed. The serpent went on nibbling imperceptibly at the sun. The
Hindus counted their beads and prayed, made ritual gestures, ducked
under the sacred slime, drank, and were moved on by the police to make
room for another instalment of the patient million. We rowed up and
down, taking snapshots. West is West.

In spite of the serpent, the sun was uncommonly hot on our backs. After
a couple of hours on the river, we decided that we had had enough, and
landed. The narrow lanes that lead from the ghats to the open streets in
the centre of the town were lined with beggars, more or less holy. They
sat on the ground with their begging bowls before them; the charitable,
as they passed, would throw a few grains of rice into each of the bowls.
By the end of the day the beggars might, with luck, have accumulated a
square meal. We pushed our way slowly through the thronged alleys. From
an archway in front of us emerged a sacred bull. The nearest beggar was
dozing at his post --- those who eat little sleep much. The bull lowered
its muzzle to the sleeping man's bowl, made a scouring movement with its
black tongue, and a morning's charity had gone. The beggar still dozed.
Thoughtfully chewing, the Hindu totem turned back the way it had come
and disappeared.

Being stupid and having no imagination, animals often behave far more
sensibly than men. Efficiently and by instinct they do the right,
appropriate thing at the right moment --- eat when they are hungry, look
for water when they feel thirst, make love in the mating season, rest or
play when they have leisure. Men are intelligent and imaginative; they
look backwards and ahead; they invent ingenious explanation for observed
phenomena; they devise elaborate and roundabout means for the
achievement of remote ends. Their intelligence, which has made them the
masters of the world, often causes them to act like imbeciles. No
animal, for example, is clever and imaginative enough to suppose that an
eclipse is the work of a serpent devouring the sun. That is the sort of
explanation that could occur only to the human mind. And only a human
being would dream of making ritual gestures in the hope of influencing,
for his own benefit, the outside world. While the animal, obedient to
its instinct, goes quietly about its business, man, being endowed with
reason and imagination, wastes half his time and energy in doing things
that are completely idiotic. In time, it is true, experience teaches him
that magic formulas and ceremonial gestures do not give him what he
wants. But until experience has taught him --- and he takes a surprisingly
long time to learn --- man's behaviour is in many respects far sillier
than that of the animal.

So I reflected, as I watched the sacred bull lick up the rice from the
dozing beggar's bowl. While a million people undertake long journeys,
suffer fatigue, hunger, and discomfort in order to perform, in a certain
stretch of very dirty water, certain antics for the benefit of a fixed
star ninety million miles away, the bull goes about looking for food and
fills its belly with whatever it can find. In this case, it is obvious,
the bull's brainlessness causes it to act much more rationally than its
masters.

To save the sun (which might, one feels, very safely be left to look
after itself) a million of Hindus will assemble on the banks of the
Ganges. How many, I wonder, would assemble to save India? An immense
energy which, if it could be turned into political channels, might
liberate and transform the country, is wasted in the name of imbecile
superstitions. Religion is a luxury which India, in its present
condition, cannot possibly afford. India will never be free until the
Hindus and the Moslems are as tepidly enthusiastic about their religion
as we are about the Church of England. If I were an Indian millionaire,
I would leave all my money for the endowment of an Atheist Mission.
:::


\clearpage
