\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## LUCKNOW {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
At the end of the second day of the All-India Musical Conference, I
declared a strike. Accustomed to the ordinary three-hour day of the
European concert goer, I found myself exhausted by the seven or eight
hours of daily listening imposed on me by the makers of the Lucknow
programme. There was one long concert every morning, another every
afternoon, a third at night. It was too much. After the second day I
would not go again. Still, before I struck, I had had sixteen hours of
Indian music --- enough, at home, to hear all the symphonies of Beethoven,
with a good sprinkling of characteristic specimens from Mozart and Bach
thrown in. Sixteen hours of listening should be enough to give one at
least the hang of an unfamiliar music.

Professional musicians, mostly attached to the courts of reigning
princes, had come to Lucknow from every part of India. There were
accomplished singers and celebrated players of every Indian
instrument --- including even the harmonium which, to my great
astonishment and greater disgust, was permitted to snore and whine in
what I was assured was the very sanctuary of Indian music. I listened to
all the virtuosity of India. That it touched me less than the more
modest accomplishment of the old Lahore musician was due, I think, to
purely physical causes. The vina and the sitar must be heard at close
quarters. All the expression and feeling that a performer puts into his
playing evaporates at a distance and nothing can be heard beyond the
jangle of the plucked strings. At Lahore I had been amazed by the
richness and variety of the tone that came out of the old musician's
sitar. At Lucknow, where the concerts were held in a large tent, I was
wearied by its tinkling monotony. Space had sucked the soul out of the
music; it came to me dry and dead.

Much is enthusiastically talked about the use of quarter tones in Indian
music. I listened attentively at Lucknow in the hope of hearing some new
and extraordinary kind of melody based on these celebrated fractions.
But I listened in vain. The scales in which Indian music is written are
of quite familiar types. The pentatonic or black-note scale, for
example, seems to be a favourite; and any one learned in ancient
European music would probably find no difficulty in labelling with their
modal names the various melodies of India. The quartertone makes its
appearance only in the slurred transition from one note of the
fundamental scale to another. The sentimental tzigane violinist and the
jazz-band player make just as free a use of quartertones as do the
Indians, and in precisely the same way.

***

There was an All-India Art Exhibition at Lucknow as well as an All-India
Musical Conference. Some of the pictures were ancient, some
contemporary. The old were not conspicuously interesting specimens, the
modern, I regret to say, were incredibly bad. I do not exaggerate when I
say that there was no contemporary exhibitor at Lucknow who showed the
smallest trace of artistic ability. I can only suppose that, for one
reason or another, those Indians who have talent do not become artists.
Of the men exhibiting at Lucknow, most, I noticed, were teachers in
Government Art Schools and therefore the last people in the world one
would expect to be artists. The others were mostly patriotic amateurs
who thought that modern India ought to have a national art of its own
and had set out to create it. The intention was laudable. But in art,
alas, intentions and high moral purpose count for very little. It is the
talent that matters, and talent was precisely the thing that none of
them possessed.

***

At the Lucknow hotel the coffee, instead of being undrinkable in the
familiar Britannic way, was made of chicory. I sipped, and
instantaneously all France was present to me --- the whole of it at once
and through twenty years of history. The Reims of last year with the
Chamonix of 1907, Grenoble before the War, Fontainebleau in 1925, Paris
at every date from the opening of the Edwardian era onwards. Within its
own particular Gallic sphere that drop of liquid chicory was as
miraculously efficacious as the Last Trump. The dead sprang to life,
were visible and spoke --- in French. There was a resurrection of French
landscapes and French monuments. Forgotten incidents re-enacted
themselves for me, against a trench background: dead pleasures and
miseries, dead shames and elations experienced within the boundaries of
France, shot up, like so many Jacks-in-the-box from under suddenly
lifted tombstones. I finished my breakfast in France and in the past,
and walked abroad. At the end of remembered and phantasmal boulevards
loomed up the relics of the Indian Mutiny and the gimcrack palaces of
the Kings of Oudh. Dark-faced and turbanned, an Indian policeman walked
clean through the tenuous ghosts of friends and lovers. Gradually the
resurrected died again; the tombstones closed on graves that were once
more tenanted. The present had conquered the past; at an impact from
outside the inward world had fallen to pieces. I addressed myself to the
enjoyment of immediate pleasures. But I looked forward to to-morrow's
breakfast; the chicory, I felt sure, would repeat the miracle. These
resuscitators of the past, these personal Last Trumps may be relied on,
if they are not abused, to produce a constant and invariable effect.
There is a certain tune (by Sousa, I think) which I can never hear
without remembering my convalescence at school after an attack of mumps.
I remember myself looking out of a window, and humming the tune,
interminably, for hours, feeling as I did so profoundly, but most
enjoyably, miserable --- goodness knows why. And then, still more
mysteriously moving, there is a certain smell, occasionally mingled with
the smoke of autumn bonfires; a smell that is due to the combustion of
some exotic rubbish, but rarely mingled with the ordinary muck, and
whose identity I have never been able to trace; a strange, sweetish
smell, like the unhealthy caricature of a scent; a smell that every time
I sniff it reminds me urgently and agonisingly of something in my past
life, some cardinal incident, some crisis, some turning point, which I
know to be profoundly significant, but which I am chronically unable to
recall. What is more irritating than to find a knot in one's
handkerchief, to be reminded that the commission was desperately
important, and to find oneself incapable of remembering what it was? I
have a feeling that if only I could remember what that bonfire smell
reminded me of, I should be perceptibly nearer to solving the problem of
the universe. But my best efforts have always proved unavailing. I have
a fear that I shall never remember.
:::


\clearpage
