\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## DELHI {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The Viceroy's speech at the opening of the Legislative Assembly was
mainly official and expository. But it contained a few more moving
passages of the few-well-chosen-words variety. His voice trembling --- a
trifle studiedly --- with suppressed emotion, His Excellency professed
himself "grieved" that the Indian response to Lord Birkenhead's
"generous gesture" (I think those were the words) had been so
inadequate. I have forgotten whether he actually went on to speak about
England's self-appointed task of preparing India for self-government.
All that I can be certain of is that the overtones of his speech were
loud with the White Man's Burden.

There was a time when I should have preferred to this rather snuffling
enunciation of pious hopes and high ideals a more brutally "realistic"
outburst in the manner of Mussolini. But that was long ago. I have
outgrown my boyish admiration for political cynicism and am now an
ardent believer in hypocrisy. The political hypocrite admits the
existence of values higher than those of immediate national, party, or
economic interest. Having made the admission he cannot permit his
actions to be too glaringly inconsistent with his professed principles.
With him there are always "better feelings" to be appealed to. But the
realist, the political cynic, has no "better feelings." A Mussolinian
Viceroy would simply say: "We are here primarily for our own profit, not
for that of the inhabitants of the country. We have immense force at our
disposal and we propose to use it ruthlessly in order to keep what we
have won. In no circumstances will we give away any of our power." To
such a man it is obviously useless to talk about democracy,
self-determination, the brotherhood of man. He does not profess to feel
the slightest respect for any of these ideas; why should he act as
though he did? A politician who professes to believe in humanitarianism
can always be reminded of his principles. He may not sincerely or
thoroughly believe in them --- though no man professes principles in which
he has no belief whatever --- but having made professions, he is afraid of
acting in a manner too wildly inconsistent with them.

The more cant there is in politics, the better. Cant is nothing in
itself; but attached to even the smallest quantity of sincerity, it
serves like a nought after a numeral, to multiply whatever of genuine
goodwill may exist. Politicians who cant about humanitarian principles
find themselves sooner or later compelled to put those principles into
practice --- and far more thoroughly than they had ever originally
intended. Without political cant there would be no democracy. Pecksniff,
however personally repulsive, is the guardian of private morality. And
if it were not for the intellectual snobs who pay --- in solid cash --- the
tribute which philistinism owes to culture, the arts would perish with
their starving practitioners. Let us thank heaven for hypocrisy.

***

Re-reading the preceding paragraph, I wonder why I wrote it. No cant, no
democracy: therefore, let there be cant. The implication of course is
that democracy is something excellent, an ideal to be passionately
wished for. But after all is democracy really desirable? European
nations certainly do not seem to be finding it so at the moment. And
even self-determination is not so popular as it was. There are plenty of
places in what was once the Austrian Empire where the years of Hapsburg
tyranny are remembered as a golden age, and the old bureaucracy is
sincerely regretted. And what is democracy, anyhow? Can it be said that
government by the people exists anywhere, except perhaps in Switzerland?
Certainly, the English parliamentary system cannot be described as
government by the people. It is a government by oligarchs for the people
and with the people's occasional advice. Do I mean anything whatever
when I say that democracy is a good thing? Am I expressing a reasoned
opinion? Or do I merely repeat a meaningless formula by force of habit
and because it was drummed into me at an early age? I wonder. And that I
am able to wonder with such a perfect detachment is due, of course, to
the fact that I was born in the upper-middle, governing class of an
independent, rich, and exceedingly powerful nation. Born an Indian or
brought up in the slums of London, I should hardly be able to achieve so
philosophical a suspense of judgment.

***

The Legislative Assembly passes a great many resolutions. The Government
acts on about one in every hundred of them. Indians are not very
enthusiastic about their budding parliament. It is not, perhaps, to be
wondered at. Indian politicians find it useful, I suppose, because they
can talk more violently within the Chamber than without. The violent
speeches are reported in the press. It is all good propaganda, no doubt.
But it is nothing more. The Government Members are, of course, well
aware that it is nothing more. Some do not even take the trouble to
conceal their knowledge, but adopt throughout the sittings of the
Assembly a consistently flippant attitude of amused and secure
superiority.

***

The wars of Troy had their Homer. But other and more significant events,
other cities vastly greater have remained uncommemorated, in the outer
darkness that lies beyond the frontiers of the little luminous world of
art. Men, places, and happenings do not always and necessarily get the
chroniclers they deserve. Shakespeare is without his Boswell and his
Holbein. The European War has not, as yet at any rate, produced its
Tolstoy or its Goya. No Swift has reacted to modern America. Nor,
finally, has contemporary Delhi, nor the new India of which it is the
capital and epitome, evolved its Marcel Proust.

How often, while at Delhi, I thought of Proust and wished that he might
have known the place and its inhabitants. For the imperial city is no
less rich in social comedy than Paris; its soul is as fertile in
snobberies, dissimulations, prejudices, hatreds, envies. Indeed, I
should say that in certain respects the comedy of Delhi is intrinsically
superior to that which Proust found in the Faubourg Saint Germain and so
minutely analysed. The finest comedy (I speak for the moment exclusively
as the literary man) is the most serious, the most nearly related to
tragedy. The comedy of Delhi and the new India, however exquisitely
diverting, is full of tragic implications. The dispute of races, the
reciprocal hatred of colours, the subjection of one people to
another --- these things lie behind its snobberies, conventions, and
deceits, are implicit in every ludicrous antic of the comedians.
Sometimes, when a thunderstorm is approaching, we may see a house, a
green tree, a group of people illuminated by a beam of the doomed sun,
and standing out with a kind of unearthly brightness against the black
and indigo of the clouds. The decaying relics of feudalism, the Dreyfus
case, the tragedies of excessive leisure --- these form the stormy
background to the Proustian comedy. The clouds, against which imperial
Delhi appears so brilliantly comical, are far more black, far more huge
and menacing.

In India I was the spectator of many incidents that might have come
straight out of "*_a la_ Recherche du Temps Perdu*"; trivial incidents,
but pregnant with the secret passions and emotions which Proust could
always find, when they were there, beneath the most ordinary gestures,
the most commonplace and innocuous words. I remember, for example, the
behaviour of an Indian guest at a certain hotel, where the European
manager made a habit of strolling about the dining-room during meals,
superintending the service, chatting with the diners and, when they rose
to leave, opening the door to let them out. The Indian, I noticed, never
gave the manager a chance of opening the door for him. When he wanted to
leave the dining-room, he would wait till the manager's back was turned
and then fairly run to the door, turn the handle and slip through, as
though the devil were after him. And indeed the devil was after
him --- the devil in the form of a painful suspicion that, if he gave the
manager an opportunity of opening the door for him, the fellow might
make a humiliating exception to his rule of courtesy and leave it
conspicuously shut.

I remember a dinner party at Delhi, at which the embarrassment was all
on the other side. An Indian politician was the host; the guests, two
other politicians, a high English official, and ourselves. It was a
cheerful evening. With the roast, the Indians began talking of the time
they had spent in gaol during the Non-Co-operation Movement. It had been
for them a not too uncomfortable and even rather comical experience.
They were men of standing; it was only natural that they should have
been exceptionally well treated. "Besides," the eldest and most eminent
of the politicians explained, parodying the words of a Great Mogul,
"rivers of champagne had flowed between me and Sir who
was the governor of the province." Rivulets, one gathered, continued to
flow, even in the prison. The conversation was entirely good-humoured,
and was punctuated with laughter. But the English official listened with
a certain embarrassment. He was, after all, a member of the executive
which had had these men thrown into gaol; and the fact that they had, on
the whole, enjoyed themselves in prison did not diminish his indirect
responsibility for their having been sent there. Nor were the comments
of the Indians on the paternal and imprisoning government any the less
scathing for being uttered with a laugh of good-natured derision. I did
not envy the official; his situation was dreadfully ticklish. He was a
guest, to begin with; moreover the post he had occupied since the
introduction of the Montford Reforms officially imposed upon him a
behaviour towards Indian politicians of more than ordinary courtesy and
cordiality. He existed, officially, to make the Legislative Assembly
work; he was there to lubricate the ill-designed and creaking machinery
of Indian parliamentary government. It was impossible for him either in
his public or his private capacity to protest against the remarks of the
Indian politicians. At the same time it was no less impossible for him,
as a member of the British executive, to accept or agree with them. He
adopted the only possible course, which was to disassociate himself
completely from the conversation, to be as though he were not. He did
it, I must say, marvellously well; so well indeed, that there was a
certain moment (the Government was catching it particularly hot) when he
seemed on the point of becoming invisible, of fading out altogether,
like the Cheshire Cat. I admired his tact and thanked God that I was not
called upon to exercise it. The lot of the modern I.C.S. official is not
entirely enviable.

And then there were the Maharajas. The Chamber of Princes --- that
remarkable assembly, attended every year by a steadily diminishing
number of Indian rulers --- was holding its sittings, while we were at
Delhi. For a week Rolls-Royces were far more plentiful in the streets
than Fords. The hotels pullulated with despots and their viziers. At the
Viceroy's evening parties the diamonds were so large that they looked
like stage gems; it was impossible to believe that the pearls in the
million-pound necklaces were the genuine excrement of oysters. How
hugely Proust would have enjoyed the Maharajas! Men with a pride of
birth more insensate than that of Charlus; fabulously rich, and
possessing in actual fact all the despotic power, of which the name of
Guermantes is only the faint hereditary symbol; having all the
idiosyncrasies and eccentricities of Proust's heroes and none of their
fear of public opinion; excessive and inordinate as no aristocrat in the
modern West could hope to be; carrying into Napoleonic or Neroian
actuality the poor potential velleities towards active greatness or vice
that are only latent in men who live in and not above society. He would
have studied them with a passionate interest, and more especially in
their relations --- their humiliating and gravely ludicrous
relations --- with the English. It would have charmed him to watch some
Rajput descendant of the Sun going out of his way to be agreeable to the
official who, though poor, insignificant, of no breeding, is in reality
his master; and the spectacle of a virtuous English matron, doing her
duty by making polite conversation to some dark and jewelled
Heliogabalus, notorious for the number of his concubines and catamites,
would have delighted him no less. How faithfully he would have recorded
their words, how completely and with what marvellous intuition he would
have divined the secret counterpoint of their thoughts! He would have
been deeply interested, too, in that curious unwritten law which decrees
that European women shall dance in public with no Indian below the rank
of Raja. And it would, I am sure, have amused him to observe the
extraordinary emollient effects upon even the hardest anti-Asiatic
sentiments of the possession of wealth and a royal title. The cordiality
with which people talk to the dear _Maharaja_ _Sahib_ --- and even,
occasionally, about him --- is delightful. My own too distant and hurried
glimpses of the regal comedies of India made me desire to look more
lingeringly, more closely, and with a psychological eye acuter than that
with which Nature has grudgingly endowed me.

I remember so many other pregnant trifles --- The pathetic gratitude of a
young man in an out of the way place, to whom we had been ordinarily
civil, and his reluctance to eat a meal with us, for fear that he should
eat it in an un-European fashion and so eternally disgrace himself in
our eyes. The extraordinarily hearty, back-slapping manner of certain
educated Indians who have not yet learned to take for granted their
equality with the ruling Europeans and are for ever anxious loudly to
assert it. The dreadfully embarrassing cringing of others. The scathing
ferocity of the comments which we overheard, in the gallery of the
Legislative Assembly, being made on the Indian speakers by the
women-folk of certain Government Members. Listening, I was reminded of
the sort of things that were said by middle-class people in England
about the workmen, at the time of the coal strike. People whose
superiority is precarious detest with passion all those who threaten it
from below.

Nor must I forget --- for Proust would have devoted a score of pages to
it --- the noble Anglo-Indian convention of dressing for dinner. From the
Viceroy to the young clerk who, at home, consumes high tea at sunset,
every Englishman in India solemnly "dresses." It is as though the
integrity of the British Empire depended in some directly magical way
upon the donning of black jackets and hard-boiled shirts. Solitary men
in Dak Bungalows, on coasting steamers, in little shanties among the
tiger-infested woods, obey the mystical imperative and every evening put
on the funereal uniform of English prestige. Women, robed in the latest
French creations from Stratford-atte-Bowe, toy with the tinned fish,
while the mosquitoes dine off their bare arms and necks. It is
magnificent.

Almost more amazing is that other great convention for the keeping up of
European prestige --- the convention of eating too much. Five meals a
day --- two breakfasts, luncheon, afternoon tea, and dinnerware standard
throughout India. A sixth is often added in the big towns where there
are theatres and dances to justify late supper. The Indian who eats at
the most two meals a day, sometimes only one --- too often none --- is
compelled to acknowledge his inferiority. In his autobiography Gandhi
records his youthful lapses --- after what frightful wrestlings with his
conscience! --- into meat eating. A fellow schoolboy led him into the sin.
Meat, the tempter speciously argued, was the secret of English
supremacy. The English were strong because they ate so much. If Indians
would stuff themselves as imperially, they would be able to turn the
English out of India. Gandhi was struck; he listened, he allowed himself
to be convinced. He ate --- three or four times, at least. Perhaps that is
why he came as near as he did to turning the English out of India. In
any case, the story proves how deeply the Indians are impressed by our
gastronomic prowess. Our prestige is bound up with overeating. For the
sake of the Empire the truly patriotic tourist will sacrifice his liver
and his colon, will pave the way for future apoplexies and cancers of
the intestine. I did my best while I was in India. But at the risk of
undermining our prestige, of bringing down the whole imperial fabric in
ruins about my ears, I used from time to time unobtrusively to skip a
course. The spirit is willing, but the flesh, alas, is weak.
:::


\clearpage
