\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## CALCUTTA {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Indian industrial workers are recruited from the villages. Tradition is
strong in the villages, and the rules of conduct are religiously and
therefore ruthlessly enforced. When the pressure from outside is relaxed
and they find themselves enjoying an unfamiliar freedom in the slums of
the great cities, these industrialised countrymen tend to go, morally,
to pieces.

Contact with strangers who play the game of life according to unfamiliar
rules tends to weaken the compulsive force of commandments which, in the
village, are unquestionably obeyed. For moralities, however excellent
and efficient each may be when alone, are mutually destructive. They are
like spiders --- cannibals of their own kind. Brought into contact in the
mind of a simple man, they will devour one another and leave him without
any morality at all. And while it weakens the countryman's powers of
resisting criminal temptations, city life at the same time multiplies
the opportunities of profitable crime. In the village, where the actions
of each individual are known to all the others, honesty, chastity, and
temperance are the best policy. In the slums of a huge city, where every
man is, so to speak, anonymous and solitary in the crowd, they may
easily cease to be profitable. The honest, domestic, and temperate
countryman is too often transformed by contact with the town into a
thievish and fornicating drunkard.

The disturbing effects of a sudden change of environment on even the
tolerably well-educated are always and everywhere apparent. On their
first arrival in Paris young English and American men will behave as
they would never dream of behaving at home. Young women, too, one is
forced to add. It was ever so. St. Boniface writing to the then
Archbishop of Canterbury complained that: "perpaucae sunt civitates in
Longobardia vel in Francia aut in Gallia, in qua non sit adultera vel
meretrix generis Anglorum, quod scandalum est et turpitudo totius
ecclesiae vostrae." That was 745 A.D.; but the Saint might have been
prophetically describing the state of things in 1926. The modern
Italians tell an anecdote about a foreigner who asked a Florentine
acquaintance why there were so few light and complaisant ladies to be
found in his otherwise admirable city. The Florentine shrugged his
shoulders. "Abbiamo le Americane," he explained. The story is doubtless
untrue; but it is significant that it should ever have been invented.

In India the importance to the individual of his community with its
traditional religion, its traditional code of rules, is vastly greater
than it is in the West. Deprived of these supports, the Indian finds it
hard to stand. On him, therefore, the effect of a change of environment
from the village to the distant city is generally much more serious than
it would be to a Westerner.

The growth of industrialism in India has been accompanied by a
corresponding break up of rural community life. Up to the present,
however, industrialism has made but small progress in India, and village
life as a whole is almost intact. But a beginning has been made and we
may divine from Calcutta, Bombay, and Cawnpore what a largely
industrialised India might become. The prophetic vision is not
particularly inspiring. But material conditions may be improved and I
like to think that the emancipation of a section of the population from
the bonds of community life may prove in the end to be spiritually
healthful. Up till now, as any one who knows the slums of Indian
industrial towns will tell you, emancipation has only been harmful. But
in time, perhaps, the urbanised peasant will learn to accommodate
himself to liberty. Freed from communal restraints, he may learn to
develop his own personal resources in a manner hitherto unknown in rural
India, where the human unit has always been the community, not the
individual man or woman.

It is a pleasing hope and one to which, as a lover of freedom and of
change, a hater of fixity and ready-made commandments, a believer in
individuals, and an infidel wherever groups, communities and crowds are
concerned, I cherish with a peculiar fondness. Hinduism and the Indian
village system have been praised on the score that they have preserved
the Indian people and the Indian character, have kept them unaltered and
the same through centuries of physical assault and spiritual battery. To
me the achievement seems more worthy of blame than of praise. Fixity is
appalling. It is better, it seems to me, to be destroyed, to become
something unrecognisably different, than to remain forever intact and
the same, in spite of altering circumstance.

But these, no doubt, are jejune and romantic prejudices, born of false
notions regarding the end and aim of human existence --- of what is
perhaps the first and fundamental false notion that human existence has
any aim or end whatever, beyond its own prolongation and reproduction.
To one who believes that man is here on earth to adventure, to know, to
try all things, to advance (if only for the fun of advancing, of not
standing still) towards some quite unattainable goal of perfection, the
Indian scheme of existence will seem unsatisfactory in the extreme. But
if man (which may in reality be the case) is born only that he may live
for a little, beget offspring, and die to make room for those he has
begotten, then the Indian village community will seem the almost perfect
form of social organisation. In an Indian village men can scratch up a
living, breed, and die, without wasting a particle of their energy on
vain experiments, on the pursuit of ideal will-o'-the-wisps, on the
making of progress foredoomed by nature and man's own destructiveness to
lead nowhere. The only real flaw that I can discover in Indian village
life is that it is profoundly boring. Change, incessant experiment, the
hunt for knowledge are interesting. That is the best, perhaps the only,
justification for these things.

That human beings will ever be able to dispense altogether with the
Indian village or its equivalent seems doubtful. Man needs something
outside himself to hang on to --- a stable society, a system of
conventions, a house, a piece of land, possessions, a family. Already in
the most completely urbanised and industrialised parts of our world we
can find migrant populations of men and women, who live in no place long
enough to become attached to it or influenced by its spirit, who own no
land, nor any tangible possessions --- only the convenient symbol of
money --- who have few or no children, who believe in no organised
religion. These people are being compelled, by their mode of life, to
impose an enormous strain on their own resources of mind and will, on
personal relationships with their fellows --- on love, marriage,
friendship, family ties. They have nothing solid, outside themselves, on
which they can lean. The strain they impose on them is often more than
their spiritual resources and their personal relationships will bear.
Hence a dissatisfaction, a shallowness of life, a profound uncertainty
of purpose.

I have always felt a passion for personal freedom. It is a passion which
the profession of writing has enabled me to gratify. A writer is his own
master, works when and where he will, and is paid by a quite impersonal
entity, the public, with whom it is unnecessary for him to have any
direct dealings whatever.

Professionally free, I have taken care not to encumber myself with the
shackles that tie a man down to one particular plot of ground; I own
nothing, nothing beyond a few books and the motor car which enables me
to move from one encampment to another.

It is pleasant to be free, when one has enough to do and think about to
prevent one's ever being bored, when one's work is agreeable and seems
(pleasing illusion!) worth while, when one has a clear conception of
what one desires to achieve and enough strength of mind to keep one,
more or less undeviatingly, on the path that leads to this goal. It is
pleasant to be free. But occasionally, I must confess, I regret the
chains with which I have not loaded myself. In these moods I desire a
house full of stuff, a plot of land with things growing on it; I feel
that I should like to know one small place and its people intimately,
that I should like to have known them for years, all my life. But one
cannot be two incompatible things at the same time. If one desires
freedom, one must sacrifice the advantages of being bound. It is, alas,
only too obvious.

***

Any given note of a melody is in itself perfectly meaningless. A melody
is an organism in time and the whole, or at least a considerable
proportion of the whole, must be heard, through an appropriate duration,
before the nature of the tune can be discovered. It is, perhaps, the
same with life. At any given moment life is completely senseless. But
viewed over a long period, it seems to reveal itself as an organism
existing in time, having a purpose, tending in a certain direction. That
life is meaningless may be a lie so far as the whole of life is
concerned. But it is the truth at any given instant. The note, A
natural, is in itself insignificant. But the note A natural, when
combined in a certain way with a certain number of other notes, becomes
an essential part of the "Hymn to Joy" in Beethoven's *Choral Symphony*.
It is conceivable that the moment of world existence, of which we are
each aware during a human life-time, may be an essential part in a
musical whole that is yet to be unfolded. And do the notes which we have
already deciphered in the records of history and geology justify us in
supposing that we are living a melody --- a melody almost infinitely
prolonged? It is a matter of opinion.

***

The experimenter's is a curious and special talent. Armed with a tea
canister and some wire, with silk, a little sealing-wax, and two or
three jam-pots, Faraday marched forth against the mysterious powers of
electricity. He returned in triumph with their captured secrets. It was
just a question of suitably juxtaposing the way, the glass jars, the
wires. The mysterious powers couldn't help surrendering. So simple --- if
you happened to be Faraday.

And if you happened to be Sir J. C. Bose, it would be so simple, with a
little clockwork, some needles and filaments, to devise machines that
would make visible the growth of plants, the pulse of their vegetable
"hearts," the twitching of their nerves, the processes of their
digestion. It would be so simple --- though it cost even Bose long years
of labour to perfect his instruments.

At the Bose Institute in Calcutta, the great experimenter himself was
our guide. Through all an afternoon we followed him from marvel to
marvel. Ardently and with an enthusiasm, with a copiousness of ideas
that were almost too much for his powers of expression and left him
impatiently stammering with the effort to elucidate methods, appraise
results, unfold implications, he expounded them one by one. We watched
the growth of a plant being traced out automatically by a needle on a
sheet of smoked glass; we saw its sudden, shuddering reaction to an
electric shock. We watched a plant feeding; in the process it was
exhaling minute quantities of oxygen. Each time the accumulation of
exhaled oxygen reached a certain amount, a little bell, like the bell
that warns you when you are nearly at the end of your line of
typewriting, automatically rang. When the sun shone on the plant, the
bell rang often and regularly. Shaded, the plant stopped feeding; the
bell rang only at long intervals, or not at all. A drop of stimulant
added to the water in which the plant was standing set the bell wildly
tinkling, as though some record-breaking typist were at the machine.
Near it --- for the plant was feeding out of doors --- stood a large tree.
Sir J. C. Bose told us that it had been brought to the garden from a
distance. Transplanting is generally fatal to a full-grown tree; it dies
of shock. So would most men if their arms and legs were amputated
without an anaesthetic. Bose administered chloroform. The operation was
completely successful. Waking, the anaesthetised tree immediately took
root in its new place and flourished.

But an overdose of chloroform is as fatal to a plant as to a man. In one
of the laboratories we were shown the instrument which records the
beating of a plant's "heart." By a system of levers, similar in
principle to that with which the self-recording barometer has made us
familiar, but enormously more delicate and sensitive, the minute
pulsations which occur in the layer of tissue immediately beneath the
outer rind of the stem, are magnified --- literally millions of
times --- and recorded automatically in a dotted graph on a moving sheet
of smoked glass. Bose's instruments have made visible things that it has
been hitherto impossible to see, even with the aid of the most powerful
microscope. The normal vegetable "heart beat," as we saw it recording
itself, point by point on the moving plate, is very slow. It must take
the best part of a minute for the pulsating tissue to pass from maximum
contraction to maximum expansion. But a grain of caffeine or of camphor
affects the plant's "heart" in exactly the same way as it affects the
heart of an animal. The stimulant was added to the plant's water, and
almost immediately the undulations of the graph lengthened out under our
eyes and, at the same time, came closer together: the pulse of the
plant's "heart" had become more violent and more rapid. After the
pick-me-up we administered poison. A mortal dose of chloroform was
dropped into the water. The graph became the record of a death agony. As
the poison paralysed the "heart," the ups and downs of the graph
flattened out into a horizontal line half-way between the extremes of
undulation. But so long as any life remained in the plant, this medial
line did not run level, but was jagged with sharp irregular ups and
downs that represented in a visible symbol the spasms of a murdered
creature desperately struggling for life. After a little while, there
were no more ups and downs. The line of dots was quite straight. The
plant was dead.

The spectacle of a dying animal affects us painfully; we can see its
struggles and, sympathetically, feel something of its pain. The unseen
agony of a plant leaves us indifferent. To a being with eyes a million
times more sensitive than ours, the struggles of a dying plant would be
visible and therefore distressing. Bose's instrument endows us with this
more than microscopical acuteness of vision. The poisoned flower
manifestly writhes before us. The last moments are so distressingly like
those of a man, that we are shocked by the newly revealed spectacle of
them into a hitherto unfelt sympathy.

Sensitive souls, whom a visit to the slaughter-house has converted to
vegetarianism, will be well advised, if they do not want to have their
menu still further reduced, to keep clear of the Bose Institute. After
watching the murder of a plant, they will probably want to confine
themselves to a strictly mineral diet. But the new self-denial would be
as vain as the old. The ostrich, the sword-swallower, the glass-eating
fakir are as cannibalistic as the frequenters of chop-houses, take life
as fatally as do the vegetarians. Bose's earlier researches on
metals --- researches which show that metals respond to stimuli, are
subject to fatigue and react to poisons very much as living vegetable
and animal organisms do --- have deprived the conscientious practitioners
of *ahimsa* of their last hope. They must be cannibals, for the simple
reason that everything, including the "inanimate" is alive.

This last assertion may seem --- such is the strength of inveterate
prejudice --- absurd and impossible. But a little thought is enough to
show that it is, on the contrary, an assertion of what is *a priori*
probable. Life exists. Even the most strict and puritanical physicists
are compelled, albeit grudgingly, to admit the horridly disquieting
fact. Life exists, manifestly, in a small part of the world we know. How
did it get there? There are two possible answers. Either it was, at a
given moment, suddenly introduced into a hitherto completely inanimate
world from outside and by a kind of miracle. Or else it was, with
consciousness, inherent in the ultimate particles of matter and, from
being latent, gradually extrinsicated itself in ever increasingly
complicated and perfect forms. In the present state of knowledge-or
ignorance, put it how you will --- the second answer seems the more likely
to be correct. If it is correct, then one might expect that inanimate
matter would behave in the same way as does matter which is admittedly
animate. Bose has shown that it does. It reacts to stimuli, it suffers
fatigue, it can be killed. There is nothing in this that should astonish
us. If the conclusion shocks our sense of fitness, that is only due to
the fact that we have, through generations, made a habit of regarding
matter, as something dead; a lump that can be moved, and whose only real
attribute is extension. Motion and extension are easily measured and can
be subjected to mathematical treatment. Life, especially in its higher,
conscious forms, cannot. To deny life to matter and concentrate only on
its measurable qualities was a sound policy that paid by results. No
wonder we made a habit of it. Habits easily become a part of us. We take
them for granted, as we take for granted our hands and feet, the sun,
falling downstairs instead of up, col. ours and sounds. To break a
physical habit may be as painful as an amputation; to question the
usefulness of an old-established habit of thought is felt to be an
outrage, an indecency, a horrible sacrilege.

> Crains dans le mur aveugle un regard qui t'épie.

It was all very well from a poet. One could smile indulgently at a
pleasing and childish fancy. But when it came to laboratory experiments
and graphs, things, it was felt, were getting more serious. It was time
to make a protest.

Personally, I make no protest. Being only a literary man and not one of
those physicists, whose professional interest it is to keep matter in
its place, with only such attributes as render it amenable to
mathematics, I am delighted. I love matter, I find it miraculous, and it
pleases me when a serious man, like Bose, comes along and gives it a new
certificate of merit.

In the philosophy books matter is generally spoken of slightingly, as
something lumpish and crude. To the subtlety of their own minds, on the
other hand, the metaphysicians can never pay a sufficiently glowing
tribute. But in reality --- if I may be pardoned the philosophically gross
expression --- it is to matter, not mind, that the attributes of subtlety,
fineness, complexity belong. Our mental picture of the world and its
component parts is a crude symbolical affair, having about as much
relation to the original as a New Guinea idol to the human body. It is
precisely because it is so crude and simple that the thought-picture is
valuable to us. Reality --- again I apologise --- is infinitely too
complicated for our understanding. We must simplify. But having
simplified, we ought not to say that those Papuan images of the world,
which are our philosophical and religious systems, our scientific
hypotheses, are subtle; they are not. They are crude, compared with the
original, and it is, precisely, their crudeness which gives them value,
for us. Year by year, our world-picture becomes increasingly
complicated. More details are noted in the original and are
incorporated, symbolically into the image. If the mind of man develops
and grows more subtle, that is due to the fact that each succeeding
generation is brought up with a progressively more complete and
elaborate thought-picture of the world and all its details. We think, we
also feel, more subtly and multifariously than did the ancients. To our
posterity, a thousand years from now, our subtleties will seem, no
doubt, most barbarously crude. Perfection will be attained when mind has
completely understood matter and is therefore as delicate, as complex,
as variously rich as it. That is to say, perfection will never be
attained.
:::


\clearpage
