\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## ON THE HOOGLY {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The ship slides down the Hoogly, between the mudbanks and the palms.
Every now and then we pass a village, a huge white jute mill. Above the
flat plain of the delta the sky is enormous and peopled with majestic
clouds. After these months lived under a perpetually flawless blue, the
spectacle of clouds is a delight and a refreshment. I understand, now,
the inspiration of those Mogul paintings, which represent princesses and
great lords looking at the clouds. A dry season in India makes one long
for a break in the monotony of too perfect weather. Cloud-gazing, when
at last the approaching rains render it possible, must be a most
delicious pastime, particularly when combined (as the Moguls in the
paintings combine it) with dalliance, the sipping of sherbet, and the
slow deliberate smoking of an enormous hubble-bubble.

These clouds are messengers from the world that lies beyond the borders
of India; my pleasure at seeing them is symbolical. For, to tell the
truth, I am glad to be leaving India. I have met old friends in India,
and made new friends; I have seen many delightful and interesting
things, much beauty, much that is strange, much that is grotesque and
comical. But all the same I am glad to be going away. The reasons are
purely selfish. What the eye does not see, the heart does not grieve
over. It is because I do not desire to grieve that I am glad to be
going. For India is depressing as no other country I have ever known.
One breathes in it, not air, but dust and hopelessness. The present is
unsatisfactory, the future dubious and menacing. The forces of the West
have been in occupation for upwards of a century and a half. And yet
five generations of peace and settled government have made the country,
as a whole, no more prosperous than it was in the days of anarchy;
according to some authorities, such as Digby, they have made it much
poorer. Millions, at any rate, are still admittedly without enough to
eat, all their lives. Custom and ancient superstition are still almost
as strong as they ever were, and after a century and a half of Western
government, nine Indians out of ten cannot read or write, and the tenth,
who can, detests the Europeans who taught him. The educated and
politically conscious profess democratic principles; but their instincts
are profoundly and almost ineradicably aristocratic. They desire,
theoretically, to see the country "progressing" in the Western sense of
the term; but the practical ambition of most of them is to secure a
quiet job without responsibilities or risks.

Meanwhile the mountains of unnecessary labour, of evitable hardship and
superfluous suffering are piled up, patiently, higher and ever higher.
Millions upon millions are born and painfully live --- to what end? God
knows, it is hard enough to find a reason anywhere, West or East. But in
India there is no conceivable answer to the question, at any rate in
terms of the present existence. Metempsychosis had to be invented and
the doctrine of *karma* elaborated with a frightful logic, before the
serried, innumerable miseries of India could be satisfactorily accounted
for.

The ship goes sliding down stream. The clouds seem to beckon and lead
on, away. To-morrow we shall be at sea.
:::


\clearpage
