\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## ON THE IRRAWADDY {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Ancient geographers imagined a river running completely round the earth.
Travelling up the Irrawaddy from Mandalay, I wished that their fancy had
been the truth. How delightful it would have been to go on and on in
that leisured and comfortable paddle steamer, gliding calmly through
every temperature and nation, every city of the earth, and every natural
phenomenon! The banks slide past, the country opens and shuts like a
fan, plays the peacock with its plains and avenues and receding dykes.
Turning deliberately, the mountains exhibit, now one face, now another,
now a garment of sunset rose, now of black against the stars, now of
green, now of dim remote indigo and purple. From time to time cities and
villages variously beckon. On jutting headlands the stumps of ancient
towers and temples look down and consider the reflection of their
irrevocably perished splendour. And all the time the current
symbolically flows, the sailing ships, the rafts, the little canoes
approach, drift past, recede and vanish like so many lives and loves.
Such is river travelling at its best, as it ought to be --- as it
certainly would be, if the ancient geographers were right and the earth
were indeed girdled by a cosmic stream.

The upper reaches of the Irrawaddy would certainly form a section of
this great imaginary river. In their kind they are perfect. Between
Mandalay and Bhamo I found myself constantly reminded of those strange
and beautiful pages in which Edgar Allan Poe describes "The Domain of
Arnheim." It is long years since I read the story; but I remember
vividly the crystal river which gave access to the domain, I remember
the white sands, the green and sloping lawns, the flowering trees, the
woods --- all the natural beauties so artfully arranged. For the domain of
Arnheim was a masterpiece in the art of landscape gardening; it was
nature, but composed; it was the non-human chaos of the world informed
by the spirit of man. The hills and jungles of Upper Burma are savagely
innocent of human arrangement; but chance has often contrived to group
them significantly and with art about their central river. Here, on a
certain calm evening, the water and the plain, the distant mountains,
the limpid greenish sky fell all at once into ready-made Claude
Lorraines; and the white pagoda in the foreground, on the river's bank,
was a fragment of ancient Rome, a ruin of Carthage. Claude persisted for
miles; and appropriately enough, while we were steaming through him, a
cool delicious fragrance, like the scent of distant tobacco flowers,
haunted the air. It seemed as though the spirit of his art were finding
expression in terms of another sense than that of sight.

At another place the hills came nearer; the narrow strip of plain
between the river and their feet was covered with teak trees, intensely
and darkly green. It was late afternoon; the trees shone in the warm and
level light, the hills behind them were flushed and at a certain moment
the vision framed in the open window was a strong and glowing Constable.
And in the defiles, where the river breaks through a range of hills and
the thick multitudinous jungle comes swarming down to the water's edge,
each turn of the stream revealed a rich fantastic composition --- the
composition of some artist not yet born, but destined, it was obvious,
to be a master.

But not every landscape is a work of art and river travelling is not
invariably delightful. So, alas, we discovered, as we journeyed
down-stream from Mandalay towards Rangoon. The weather, as we advanced,
grew almost hourly more oppressive; the cattle and hides with which our
streamer was loaded, piercingly stank; the landscape was almost as poor
as the food. On either side of the mile-wide river the country was
mostly flat and treeless. For a day we steamed through the pale and arid
hills of the Burma oil-fields. An immense black smoke, visible through
all a morning's navigation, streamed half across the sky. A strike was
in progress; the Burmese, who objected, justifiably from all accounts,
to the Wild West methods and cinema manners of the American drillers,
had committed a murder and set alight to eight hundred thousand gallons
of petroleum. A spirited race, the Burmese --- a little too highly so,
perhaps. But whatever the rights and wrongs, in these particular
circumstances, of murder and arson, that streamer of black smoke
certainly did something to enliven the prospect. I regretted it, when at
last it sank out of sight.

But the monotony was not entirely without alleviations. At Pakkoku, for
example (Pakkoku, which the French lady on the steamer would insist on
calling "Pas Cocu" --- I suppose because her husband so manifestly was
one) an acrobat was doing extraordinary things on a slack rope. At
another town, whose less significant name I have forgotten, we stopped
for several hours to embark some scores of tons of monkey nuts. They
were bound for Rangoon and thence, I learned, for Marseilles, where, in
due course, they would be turned into Pure Superfine Proven√ßal Olive
Oil. At a village lower down the river, we shipped the best part of a
thousand lacquered kettle-drums --- for home consumption, I suppose. They
were charming instruments, shaped like enormous egg-cups --- a foot, a
stalk, a bowl with the parchment stretched across its mouth. What a
cargo of potential Burmese happiness we were carrying under those taut
diaphragms! But none leaked out into the ship. It was an odious voyage,
and when at last we reached Prome, whence the railway starts for
Rangoon, it was with a feeling of profound relief that we disembarked.
Near the landing-stage stood two tall trees, sparse-leaved against the
sky, and laden with an innumerable and repulsive fruitage of sleeping
bats. The sun was sinking. With the waning of light, the bats began to
stir. What had seemed a vegetable unfolded and slowly stretched a
leathery wing. There was a sudden flutter, an agitation of twigs, and
two of the pendulous black fruits came together and began to make love,
head downwards.
:::


\clearpage
