\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## BHAMO {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Between the main street of Bhamo and the river-bank, or what will be the
river-bank, after the rains --- for at this dry season the water is
distant a hundred yards or more across a beach of sand --- lies a little
plain of two or three acres. It is a much trodden, dusty plat of land
and, save for one enormous tree growing in the midst, quite bare. It is
a fine tree, not at all tropical in aspect, but oak-like, with long
limbs branching almost horizontally from the trunk some fifteen or
twenty feet above the ground. The very image of those great trees which,
in Callot's etchings, give shelter to the encamped gypsies, protect the
archers, as they do their target practice on St. Sebastian, from the
rays of the sun, or serve as convenient gallows for the victims of war.
But it was not alone the tree that reminded me of Callot; it was its
setting, it was the whole scene. The river in its mile-wide bed, with
the flat fields beyond it, provided for the solitary tree that
background of blank interminable extension, to which Callot was always
so partial. Nor was the bustle immediately beneath and around the tree
less characteristic than the blank behind it. Horses and little mules
stood tethered beside their loaded pack-saddles. Men came and went with
burdens, or stood in groups round one of the patient beasts. In the
foreground food was being cooked over a fire and, squatting on their
heels, other men were eating. Under the huge tree and against the blank
background of receding flatness and empty sky, a multitudinous and
ant-like life was being busily lived. It might have been the break-up of
a gipsy encampment, or the tail end of Impruneta Fair, or a military
bivouac out of the *Miseries of War*. It might have been --- but in fact
it was the starting of one of the caravans that march, laden with cotton
and Burmese silk, Burmese jade and rubies, over the hills into China.

***

Lying as it does but thirty miles from the Chinese frontier, Bhamo is
more than half a Chinese town. On its northern fringes stands a sizeable
joss-house. The Chinese resort there to pray, to burn candles and
incense, to record their wishes, and to discover by the religious
equivalent of tossing --- heads or tails --- whether the gods have consented
to their fulfilment. They go there also to drink tea and gamble, even to
smoke a quiet pipe of opium. One spectral creature, at any rate, was
doing so when we walked through the temple. Near him a group of his
fellows were busily dicing; blank-eyed, ivory-faced, he sat apart,
remote, as though he were inhabiting, as indeed he was, another world.

The inner courts, the actual shrine of the joss-house, were extravagant
in their chinoiserie. Those fretted roofs, those great eaves turning up
at the corners like horns, those tall thin pillars, those golds and
scarlets, those twilights peopled by gilded images, serene or
grotesque --- all these things, one felt; might almost have been designed
by Lady Orford, they seemed almost the *dixhuitième* parody of Chinese
art. Fantastic they were, eminently amusing, even good in their way;
only the way happened to be rather a tiresome one. But if, within, the
joss-house was a Manchu extravagance, without, it achieved the simple
and supremely elegant beauty of an earlier period. The gate-house of the
temple was a small white stuccoed building, quite plain except for the
raised panels of brickwork which strengthened the angles of the façade
and, like the ornamental pilasters of our classical architecture, served
to underline the vertical movement of the design. It was covered with a
low tiled roof, discreetly turned up at the corners, that the dead
horizontal line might be made supple and alive. At the bottom, in the
centre, one of those circular gateways, to which the Chinese are so
partial, gave access to the inner courts of the temple. Above and to
either side of it a pair of square windows lighted the upper floor. And
that was all. But the proportions were so perfect, the gate and the
windows so rightly placed, the faintly curving roof so graceful, that
the little building seemed a masterpiece. Its simple and assured
elegance made me think of Italy --- of little stucco pavilions on the
Brenta, of Tuscan and Roman villas, of all those unpretentious yet
beautiful, yet truly noble houses which adorn the Italian countryside.
This Chinese gate-house was classical, the product of an ancient and
traditional art, slowly perfected. Here in Burma, where the national
architecture is the architecture of the travelling circus and the
amusement park, it seemed doubly beautiful. And when we went out into
the streets, we found the same perfected and classical beauty for sale
at every Chinese shop at two or three annas a specimen. The little
Chinese tea-cups of earthenware, glazed white within, bird's egg green
without, are the cheapest crockery, and among the most beautiful, in the
world. The Chinese shopkeepers were all but giving them away. And the
bowls like eight-petalled flowers, painted with cocks and roses, yellow
and pale vermilion and green on a softly glazed white ground --- how much
were we asked for those? I forget; but it was certainly well under
sixpence apiece. Their beauty was worth a little fortune.

We spent a shilling and walked back to the steamer, loaded with the
lovely product of centuries of human patience, skill, and genius. In our
cabin we unpacked our shillingsworth of Chinese civilisation and
examined it at leisure: it was overwhelmingly impressive.
:::


\clearpage
