\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## PENANG {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Penang has a certain Sicilian air. It is a sort of Palermo, lacking
indeed the architecture and the orange groves, those characteristically
Mediterranean amenities, but rich in a tropical wealth of wicker huts
and naked children, of coco palms and jungle. Walking on the Peak, we
found ourselves at a certain point looking down an almost precipitous
ravine into the forest. We were in a fold of the hills, shut off from
the sea breeze. It was prodigiously hot, and from the dense green tangle
below us there came up a thick and hardly breathable steam, that smelt
like that first hot and sweetish puff of air which fills your nostrils
and condenses in blinding moisture on your spectacles, as you open the
door of the Great Palm House at Kew Gardens. There could be no mistake
this time; we were genuinely in the tropics.

***

We were in Penang on the last day of the Chinese New Year celebrations.
The temples were thronged with a crowd mostly of women and young girls.
They were exquisitely and richly dressed. Gold pins and flowers were
stuck in their glossy black hair. Their earrings and bracelets were of
the translucent jade which commands among the Celestials a price that
seems to us fantastic.

And what beauty, what a charm they had! From the smooth ivory faces the
bright and, for us at any rate, strangely expressionless eyes looked
out, startlingly black against the pale skin. The lovely and perverse
creatures who float through Marie Laurencin's paintings have the same
smooth whiteness of cheek and forehead, the same black, bright and
bird-like regard. And the long slender Chinese necks --- these too were
Laurencinian. And the exquisite fine hands. But Marie Laurencin's
beauties have a length of leg and a grace of movement in which these
charming Celestials were sadly lacking. Chinese hands are generally
beautiful, and the gestures that are made with them have a wonderful
refinement, a traditional and artistic elegance. But the walk of the
Chinese woman is curiously without grace. It is a toddle, charming and
appealing in its absurdity, but totally without dignity. Their hands
move classically and in the Grand Manner; but their walk is trivially
rococo. They are, so to speak, High Renaissance from the waist upwards
and a Louis Philippe bibelot below. The imperial deportment of the
Indian woman seems to be quite unknown among the Chinese. But then the
Indians, like the peasant women of Italy, who bear themselves like
queens, are accustomed to carrying burdens on their heads. The Chinese,
so far as I know, are not. Nothing so much improves the deportment as
the balancing of a six gallon jar on the crown of the skull. There are
plenty of European as well as Chinese ladies, whose appearance would be
vastly improved by a daily performance of this exercise. It would as
effectively correct the western droop and slouch as the Extreme Oriental
toddle.
:::


\clearpage
