\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## BETWEEN PENANG AND SINGAPORE {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Our journey from Penang to Singapore began at night. We were carried in
darkness through the invisible forest. The noise of the insects among
the trees was like an escape of steam. It pierced the roaring of the
train as a needle might pierce butter. I had thought man preeminent at
least in the art of noise making. But a thousand equatorial cicadas
could shout down a steel works; and with reinforcements they would be a
match for machine guns.

Morning revealed the forest, hushed now under the light. The railway
line was a little groove, scored through the growing layers of green
down to the red earth. Fifty yards to either side of the train rose the
walls of the cutting. Looking at them I wondered where in this solid
verdure the uproarious insects found a place to live.

Every tourist is haunted by the desire to "get off the Beaten Track." He
wants, in the first place, to do something which other people have not
done. The longing to be in some way or other unique grows with every
increase of standardisation. American advertisers, whom it pays to be
psychologists, have understood this pathetic trait in the character of
their contemporaries. In what are, for some reason, styled the "Better
Magazines" you will see dignified advertisements of motor cars,
overcoats, radio sets, note-paper, chocolates, whose outstanding merit
is announced to be their "exclusiveness." The word attracts a million
buyers, who cherish their mass-produced treasure as though it were a
masterpiece, and who feel proud --- at any rate until they meet a few of
their fellow buyers --- in the "exclusive" possession of something unique.
The tourist is like the reader of advertisements. He wants something for
his money which nobody else possesses. Everybody has been to Rome; but
few have visited Nepi. Java is well known; but who has landed at Ternate
or Lombok? It is delightful to be able to get up in a Western
drawing-room and say: "When I was last in the interior of Papua. ..."

But it is not alone the desire to achieve uniqueness that makes the
tourist so anxious to leave the Beaten Track. It is not the anticipated
pleasure of boasting about his achievements. The incorrigible romantic
in every one of us believes, with a faith that is proof against all
disappointments, that there is always something more remarkable off the
Beaten Track than on it, that the things which it is difficult and
troublesome to see must for that very reason be the most worth seeing.
Those who travel pursue some phantom which perpetually eludes them; they
are always hoping to discover some mode of life that is somehow
fundamentally different from any mode with which they are familiar; and
they imagine that they will be able, magically, as soon as they have
found it, to get into contact with this marvellous existence, to
understand and partake in it. In the obvious places and on the Beaten
Track, they never find what they are looking for. On the Beaten Track,
through whatever part of the world it may lead, men and women live
always in very much the same way, and there is no Open Sesame to their
intimacy. But perhaps off the Beaten Track, in the little out of the way
places, where the hotels are bad and there are toads in the
bathroom --- perhaps where there are no hotels, but only rest houses, with
centipedes --- perhaps in the places where you must bring your own tents
and porters, with provisions and ammunition for a campaign of
weeks --- perhaps where there is nothing but the jungle and leeches,
serpents and precipices and vampires and an occasional pygmy with a
blow-pipe and poisoned arrows ... Perhaps. But even amongst the
crocodiles and the cannibals the secret still eludes you. Life is still
fundamentally the same. Men and women are as difficult to know as
ever --- rather more so, on the whole; for your knowledge of Pygmy is
rudimentary and the little people are afraid.

It was with such meditations that I allayed the desire to leave the
Beaten Track, which the spectacle of the jungle had evoked in me. To be
devoured by leeches in the pursuit of something as hopelessly
unattainable as the foot of the rainbow --- was it worth it? Obviously
not. And I thanked heaven and the British Empire for the F.M.S. railway.
Still, I went on longing to get behind that wall of green; I went on
believing in the teeth of my own denials, that there was something
miraculous and extraordinary in the other side. Meanwhile the train
steamed on towards Singapore; an attendant from the restaurant car came
in to tell us that breakfast was ready.

A little later my longings were cured, for the time being at any rate,
by the disappearance of that which had aroused them. The jungle suddenly
vanished and its place was taken by interminable rubber plantations.
Even in maturity a rubber plantation is a poor thing. In youth it is an
eyesore. Miserably scraggy little trees planted neatly in rows flanked
the railway and continued to flank it during almost all the rest of the
day. We rolled through literally hundreds of miles of potential Dunlops,
of latent golf balls, and hot-water bottles to be. I own no rubber
shares and am a consumer of tyres and crÃªpe soles. While admiring the
energy of those who have destroyed it, I regretted the jungle. Here and
there the train passed through a stretch of country that had ceased to
be jungle and had not yet become plantation. The forest has been burnt.
A great tract of brown desolation stretches away from the railway. The
dead stumps of trees still stand, the charred trunks lie along the
ground --- the corpses and skeletons of a forest. Soon they will have been
rooted out and dragged away. The Brazilian seedlings will be planted and
in 1932 or thereabouts another million of goloshes and Malthusian
squirts will be distributed throughout a grateful world.
:::


\clearpage
