\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## BATAVIA, JAVA {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Near the Penang Gate lies an old brass cannon, half buried in the mud.
It has no history, it is quite unornamental. A more commonplace piece of
ordnance never issued from an eighteenth century arsenal. The world is
full of such old brass cannons. By all the rules it should have been
melted down long ago or stuck muzzle downwards into the ground to serve
as a post, or mounted on a little wooden carriage and left in the
weather outside the door of a museum. But destiny decreed otherwise.
Instead of suffering any of the ignominies usually reserved for its
kind, this superannuated popgun was turned into a god. It lies there in
the mud, wreathed with gardenias and orchids and a whole conservatory of
paper flowers. The ground all about it is planted with long-stemmed
paper lanterns, and incense burns perpetually before its muzzle. Two or
three hawkers are encamped all day beside it, under the trees, like the
sellers of books and plaster saints and candles in the shadow of a
cathedral. The sun god's worshippers are numerous; they do a roaring
trade in offerings and souvenirs. Great is the Cannon of the Batavians.

The Javanese were once Hindus, as their neighbours of Bali are to this
day. But now, with the other Malayan peoples of Sumatra and the
peninsula, they are Mohammedans. Mohammedans in name, at any rate; for
their monotheism is hardly more than a varnish spread over cults much
more ancient and, in the tropical circumstances, much more apposite.
Pure monotheism is probably the last religion that would suggest itself
to the minds of men living near the equator. In a tropical jungle, only
a blind deaf-mute could be a monotheist. The woods are horrible; they
teem with countless small and separate mysteries --- unaccountable sights
in the half darkness, inexplicable sounds across the silence. Nobody
with ears and eyes could fail, in a jungle, to be a believer in spirits,
ghosts and devils. The Malays may call themselves Moslems; but they are
still, at heart and by nature, animists.

Nor is it to the spirits alone that they pay their devotions. There is
no God but God and Mohammed is his prophet. No doubt. But a cannon is
cylindrical and, long before they became Moslems, the Javanese were
worshippers of the reproductive principle in nature. An immemorial
phallism has crystallised round the old gun, transforming it from a mere
brass tube into a potent deity, to be propitiated with flowers and
little lanterns, to be asked favours of with smoking incense. Men come
and, standing before the sacred symbol, silently implore assistance.
Women desirous of offspring sit on the prostrate god, rub themselves
against his verdigrised sides and pray to him for increase. Even white
ladies, it is said, may be seen at evening alighting inconspicuously
from their motor cars at the Penang Gate. They hurry across the grass to
where the God is lying. They drop a few gardenias and a supplication,
they touch the God's unresponsive muzzle; then hurry back again through
the twilight, fearful of being recognised, of being caught in the
flagrant act of worshipping at the shrine of a God, who was being adored
a thousand generations before Adam was ever thought of and beside whom
the Gods of Zoroaster and the Vedas, of Moses and Christ and Mohammed
are the merest upstarts and parvenus.
:::


\clearpage
