\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## BATAVIA {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
"In matters of commerce," it was once affirmed,

> "In matters of commerce the fault of the Dutch
>
> Is giving too little and asking too much."

But either things have changed since those lines were written, or else
the Dutch do not regard the selling of food as commerce. For there are
restaurants in Holland where, for a remarkably reasonable price, one may
eat, not only much more, but also much better food than can be had any.
where else in the world. The five-shilling luncheon at the Restaurant
Royal at the Hague is at once Gargantuan and delicious. For a foreigner,
not yet trained up to Dutch standards, the hors d'Ã¦uvres alone are
satiatingly sufficient. By the time the sixth or seventh course has made
its appearance, he throws up the fork and retires, leaving the inured
Olympic athletes of the jaw and stomach in undisputed possession of the
restaurant. For the hardiest of these heroes --- and heroines --- the
proprietors of the Royal provide a luncheon at ten shillings; it must be
almost time, when they have finished eating it, to go and dress for
dinner.

My gastronomic experiences in Holland led me to expect a no less
fabulous profusion in Colonial Java. But I was disappointed, or perhaps
relieved, to find that the hotels catered not for giants but for men and
women only about twice life size. The only truly Rabelaisian feature of
Javanese diet is the Rice Table. The Rice Table must be seen, and eaten,
to be believed. Without the co-operation of the gullet, faith cannot
swallow it. I do not even expect those who have never eaten a Rice Table
to believe my description. Marco Polo, when he returned from the court
of the Great Khan, full of true stories and correct statistics, was by
his compatriots derisively nicknamed "Marco Milione." For the sake of
the truth about Rice Tables, I am prepared with old Mark Million to be
thought a liar; here then it is --- the truth, literal but unbelievable.

It is lunch time. You enter the dining-room of the hotel. A little old
yellow waiter, looking less like a man than a kindly orang-utan, shaved
and with a batik handkerchief tied round its head, shows you to your
place, asks what you will eat. You push aside the menu of the
commonplace European lunch.

"Ane Rice Tafel for mich," you say, combining German and Lowland Scotch
into what you believe, quite erroneously, to be the language of Holland.
The kindly little monkey-man trots off, smiling; it seems to please him
when his clients decide on the Rice Table. You wait. In a little while
the monkey-man's embassy to the kitchen has its effect. A waiter appears
at your elbow with an enormous cauldron of rice; you heap your plate
with it. He moves away. Immediately another waiter takes his place,
offering fish soup. You damp your rice; the soup man goes. A dish of
chops at once replaces the tureen. Looking round, you see that the chop
carrier is standing at the head of a long procession of Javanese
waiters, extending in unbroken line from your table right across the
dining-room to the kitchen door. Each time you help yourself, the
procession advances a step and a new dish is presented. I took the
trouble one day to count the number of dishes offered me. Twenty-six
actually appeared before me; but it was a busy day for the waiters and I
do not think I got all the dishes I was entitled to. They included after
the chops, two other kinds of meat, two kinds of bird, a species of
sausage; fish, both fresh and dried; roast bananas; several kinds of
vegetables, plain and curried; two varieties of salads; fried nuts;
numerous pickles; jam; a queer kind of unleavened bread, and various
other things which I cannot at the moment remember. All these articles
are thoroughly stirred in with the rice on your plate-a trough would be
a more suitable receptacle --- the napkin is tucked firmly into place
beneath the chin and leaning forward you shovel the immense and steaming
mound of food down your throat.

But the Rice Table is really the only inordinate feature of Dutch East
Indian diet. The breakfast table may be furnished with such ill-timed
delicacies as Edam cheese, gingerbread and liver sausage; but the
porridge, the cooked meats, the eggs and fishes, the toast, the scones
and marmalade of the Anglo-Saxon breakfast are lacking. Afternoon tea is
strictly tea; one drinks, but one does not eat. Dinner is perfectly
normal and late supper is unknown. Hotels within the British Empire may
be innocent of the Rice Table; but the total amount of nourishment which
they offer in the course of each day, and which is consumed by their
clients, is decidedly greater than that which forms the daily foundation
of Greater Holland. With the possible exception of the Americans, the
English are, I am afraid, the world's heaviest eaters. They call us in
Italy "il popolo dei cinque pasti" --- the Five Meal People.

Frenchmen and Italians eat normally a little more than half the amount
of food consumed by prosperous Englishmen. Arabs and Indians about a
third or a quarter. Seeing that mental and bodily efficiency can be
attained and kept up on these smaller quantities, it follows that at
least half our eating is a matter, not of hunger or need, but of pure
gluttony, of simple and uncontrolled hoggishness.

Gluttony is numbered among the Seven Deadly Sins; but for some
reason --- perhaps because it is now so universally practised in
respectable society --- the sin is seldom denounced. Lasciviousness is
deplored by every one; anger with its attendant violences, by a
majority, at any rate in the Western and democratic countries. But
gluttony, the besetting vice of our age --- for never in the world's
history have so many men and women eaten so immoderately as they do
now --- gluttony goes almost unreproved. In the Middle Ages on the other
hand, when food was scarce and over-eating singular and conspicuous,
gluttony was freely denounced. Peace, prosperity, the colonisation of
new lands, refrigerators, easy transport and modern agriculture have
made food plentiful, at any rate in the West. Gluttony being universal
is scarcely noticed, and all the fury of the moralists is spent on other
sins, especially lasciviousness.

Now the gravity of a sin is gauged by several standards, which we
employ, when we make our judgments, either separately or together. We
may judge a sin, in the first place, by the degree of its harmfulness to
the society in which the sinner lives. Thus, the sin of anger, when it
leads to crimes of violence, is harmful to the society in which the
angry man lives, and therefore grave. Avarice is chiefly detested
because it leads to theft, and dishonest practices, which do mischief to
the avaricious man's neighbours. And so on. The application to each
particular sin is easily made.

But sin is not exclusively a social matter; its gravity is also measured
by the harm, mental or physical (and the physical is always finally also
a mental mischief) it does to the sinner himself. The first and
axiomatic duty of a man is, I suppose, to make the best use he can of
such talents as he possesses, to develop his latent powers and keep
himself at the highest pitch of efficiency. His first duty, in a word,
is to be himself. The majority of human beings live in conditions which
make it impossible for them to be themselves. A slum is, so to speak, an
Original Sin common to all its inhabitants and for which they are not
individually responsible. But a substantial minority of men and women
cannot plead the Original Sin of bad conditions to excuse their failure
to be fully themselves. These are personally accountable. For to bury
talents, to frustrate development of one's own powers, to compromise the
efficiency of mind or body are sins. It is for this reason, rather than
because they do harm to others beside the sinner, that the various forms
of sloth, lust, intemperance and self-complacent pride are sinful.

Historical circumstances may cause the gravity of sins to change at
different epochs. Thus, in a war-like society, whose very existence
depends on the courage and ferocity of the individuals composing it, the
sin of anger will not be a grave one; nor will the crimes of violence
which accompany it be considered worthy of severe censure. Our Saxon
fathers could kill a man for a few shillings; the punishment fitted the
crime and was proportionate, at that period, to the sin. Later in the
history of Western Europe there was a definite moment at which
lasciviousness became a much graver sin than it had hitherto been.
Before the introduction of venereal diseases, a moderate lechery might
do a certain, but not very serious mischief to society; but it did very
little harm, either spiritually or physically, to the lecher. Innocent
of disease, a temperately lascivious Greek was almost innocent of sin.
The Christians, as innocent at first of disease, artificially invested
the instinct with an aura of personal and social sinfulness. Later when
the Crusaders returned with their deplorable souvenirs of Oriental
travel, pleasure really and indeed became a crime. A single lapse, not a
course of excesses, could reduce a man to repulsive disfigurement,
madness, paralysis and death. Nor did he suffer alone; he murdered his
wife as well as himself and condemned his children to blindness,
deafness and deformity. Mercury and arsenic have done much to diminish
the personal sinfulness of a moderate lechery. Its social sinfulness is
succumbing to divorce and contraception, is dwindling with the gradual
decay of Christian intolerance. The progress of medicine and common
sense may end by making us as innocent as were the ancient Greeks.

It was, as I have already pointed out, a combination of historical
circumstances --- a combination of industrial prosperity with colonisation
and imperialism, of scientific agriculture with steam transport --- that
made our modern gluttony possible. It escapes censure, in our
English-speaking countries, at any rate, because it is universal in
respectable circles, because its evil effects upon society are not
immediately manifest, like those of avarice or anger, and because it
does not so immediately take its toll from the individual as does
excessive lechery or the intemperate use of drugs. But though not
immediately manifest, the effects of gluttony are none the less
deplorable. A large proportion of every man's available energy, mental
and physical (it is the same) is exhausted in the process of an
interminable and unnecessary digestion. More or less chronic costiveness
reduces vitality by sending a stream of putrefactive poison circulating
through the blood. The body is bloated with venom, the mind darkened by
the glooms and uncharitable-nesses that are the spiritual fruits of
constipation. Suffering, the glutton causes his neighbours to suffer.
And after forty or fifty years of gormandising, a cancer makes its
appearance and the victim of gluttony bids a long and excruciating
farewell to the scenes of his vice. It was syphilis that turned even
moderate and occasional lechery into sin. Cancer, which leaves the
savage and the frugal Oriental unscathed, but preys with ever increasing
fury on the overfed Westerner, is the last-paid wage, the parting gift
of a life of gluttony.

Much in the life of man to which we now attach "spiritual" and
transcendental values, might and perhaps should be revalued in terms of
hygiene. Starting from the axiom that it is a man's first duty to use
all his powers to the best purpose, to be as completely as possible
himself, we can re-interpret a great deal of morality and religion as
rules of health for the attainment and keeping up of an ideal
efficiency. Many sins, it is obvious, make a man physically unhealthy
and therefore incapable of doing or being his best --- a burden to himself
and a nuisance to his neighbours. It is unnecessary to labour the point.
But vice compromises other modes of healthful existence besides the
physical. Sin is visited by punishments more subtle than constipation,
venereal disease and all their unpleasant spiritual concomitants. For
example, there are certain human potentialities which can only be
developed into actuality when the mind is in a state of quiet. For those
who live in a state of agitation, certain kinds of serene and lasting
happiness, certain intellectual and creative processes are impossible.
Now it is precisely the excessive indulgence of those natural
proclivities called "sins" that tends to keep the mind in agitation and
prevent a man from realising what are perhaps the most important
potentialities of thought and happiness he holds within him. Sloth,
avarice, lechery and anger are hygienically unsound; they dull the mind
and trouble it, raise mud, so to speak, by stirring. Reasonable activity
of a kind which it is possible to believe worth while, a controlled
temper, a chastity not so excessive as to be harmful, a humility
unpreoccupied with the trivial fears, desires, and hopes which fill the
life of the vain and proud-these things are hygienically sound, because
they make it possible for the man who practises them to realise the
potentialities which, were his mind kept by vice in a state of agitated
distraction, would perforce remain latent and for ever unactual.

Mysticism, which is the systematic cultivation of mental quietness, the
deliberate and conscious pursuit of the serenest kind of happiness, may
be most satisfactorily regarded as a rule of health. Mystics attribute
their happiness and their creative powers to a union with God. The
hypothesis is, to say the least, unnecessary. Atheists and epileptics
have received inspirations which have never been attributed to the Holy
Spirit. Every symptom of the trance --- from the "sense of presence" to
total unconsciousness can be produced artificially in the laboratory.
The drug taker, the epileptic, the suddenly "inspired" mathematician or
artist, the experimental psychologist differ from the religious mystic
only in their attitude towards the mystical experiences which they all
equally share. Believing them to be divine, the religious mystic
cultivates his experiences, makes use of them to bring him happiness and
serenity. The others accept them as merely curious sensations, like
giddiness or the hiccoughs, and do not attempt, therefore, to make a
systematic use of their experiences in the conduct of their lives. In
this they are wrong.

We are, I think, fairly safe in supposing that religious mystics do not
in fact unite themselves with that impossible being, a God at once
almighty and personal, limited and limitless. But that does not in any
way detract from the value of mysticism as a way to perfect health. No
man supposes that he is entering into direct communion with the deity
when he does Swedish exercises or cleans his teeth. If we make a habit
of MÃ¼ller and Pepsodent, we do so because they keep us fit. It is for
the same reason that we should make a habit of mysticism as well as of
moral virtue. Leading a virtuous and reasonable life, practising the
arts of meditation and recollection, we shall unbury all our hidden
talents, shall attain in spite of circumstances to the happiness of
serenity and integration, shall come, in a word, to be completely and
perfectly ourselves.

***

Hygiene is doubtless an excellent thing. But I begin to wonder, as I
reread the preceding section, why I should have found it necessary to
insist on hygiene to the total exclusion of God. Temperament, I suppose,
is partly accountable. But it is mainly an affair --- as usual --- of
unreasoning prejudices, the fruit of mental habits acquired during
childhood. Men who have had a certain kind of training can see divinity,
or the possibility of it, everywhere. Those whose upbringing has been of
a different kind spend their whole lives sterilising and hermetically
sealing their universe, so as to prevent any germ of godhead from
entering and breeding dangerously within it. They demand that the cosmos
shall be bacteriologically pure. No life; hygiene, but at all costs not
a god. Considered dispassionately, this prejudice does not seem to me
any more worthy of respect than its opposite. Indeed, it is probably
much less respectable.

The fact that men have had stupid and obviously incorrect ideas about
God does not justify us in trying to eliminate God from out of the
universe. Men have had stupid and incorrect ideas on almost every
subject that can be thought about. They have believed, for example, that
the earth is flat and that the sun revolves round it. But we do not
regard that as a valid reason for denying the existence of astronomy.

The belief that God is a person and that a real personal contact can be
established between him and a human being is probably unfounded. We are
persons ourselves, and we therefore tend to see all things in terms of
personality. The uneducated man of average intelligence tends, quite
naturally and as a matter of course, to interpret a thunderstorm in
terms of human feelings. Science provides a different and more
satisfactory interpretation. All contemporary Western men and women
possess at least the rudiments of physical science and the scientific
habit of mind as an inheritance; they have been brought up to think of
nature in terms of impersonal law, not in terms of anthropomorphic
passion. Not even the stupidest European or American now imagines that a
thunderstorm is a manifestation of divine tantrums. But among peoples
brought up in a different way, only thinkers of the highest genius can
conceive of a thunderstorm as a purely impersonal happening. There is no
well-established science of religion. The stupid Westerner has almost no
educational advantages, when it comes to religious matters, over his
savage and Oriental brothers. His natural instinct is to regard God as a
person, and he has received no training that might cause him to modify
his first spontaneous opinion as it has modified his natural, untutored
opinion about thunderstorms. Among primitive peoples there arise
occasionally men of scientific genius who know, intuitively, the truth
about thunderstorms. Where God is concerned, we are all more or less
primitives; only the greatest religious geniuses have any knowledge (and
it is knowledge of a personal, intuitive, hardly communicable kind) of
the truth about God. It is significant that Buddha, whom one feels to
have been the most intellectually powerful of all the great religious
leaders, should have rejected completely the idea of a personal God and
gone beyond it. Two thousand five hundred years hence the majority of
human beings may have arrived at the position reached by Gautama two
thousand five hundred years ago. We like to speak of ourselves as
"moderns"; but in point of fact the vast majority of us are the most
barbarously primitive of ancients.

***

Indian servants are scarcely more than pieces of moving furniture. They
have obliterated themselves, and nothing remains in your presence but a
kind of abstract and unindividualised efficiency --- or inefficiency, as
the case may be. But in Burma and throughout Malaya, wherever the
servants are Chinamen or Malays, you become aware that the machine which
makes your bed or pulls your rickshaw or waits upon you at table is
human and has no desire to suppress the fact. Its eye is critical; the
expressions on its face are comments on your words and actions. And when
you walk in the streets you have an uncomfortable feeling that you are
being judged and condemned to an eternal derision. The European woman is
generally unaware in India that the attendant machine is a man; the
thing is reliably sexless. The Burman, the Chinaman, the Malay, who have
no knowledge of caste and consider themselves the equals of any man or
woman, give no such comfortable assurance of sexlessness. To discover
humanity --- and of the most "human," the all too human variety --- in what
you have been accustomed to regard as a labour-saving device is rather
disquieting.

***

At Weltevreden there is a plot of ground dedicated to the pleasures of
the natives and called the Gambier Park. At the entrance gate you pay
according to your nationality --- Javanese five cents, foreign Orientals
(Chinese or Arab) fifteen, and Europeans, half a gulden. We admitted the
equitableness of the tariff --- for in every tropical land the poorest
people are always the inhabitants --- shouldered the white man's burden to
the tune of fifty cents apiece and walked in. The thick, almost palpable
darkness of a night overcast by tropical clouds was tempered by a few
sparse arc lamps and by the dim lanterns of mineral water vendors. Their
light was reflected from puddles; it had been raining. The night felt
and smelt like a hothouse. It seemed strange to be walking in the open.
Surely there was a glass roof just overhead, there were glass walls all
round us. And where were the hot-water pipes?

The sound of drums and bamboo xylophones, that tinkled out the endless
and incoherent music of a dripping tap, drew us across the grass. Under
a bright light twenty or thirty Javanese young men and girls were
gravely dancing. Nobody spoke. They went through their evolutions
without a word. I was reminded of the noiseless coming and going of an
aquarium, of the mute ecstasies of embracing octopuses, of submarine
battles, ferocious but inaudible. It is a strangely silent people, the
Javanese. Some merman, perhaps, from the soundless depths among the
corals was the first colonist of the island. We stood for some time
watching the dumb Tritons in their batik skirts or trousers, the
voiceless but, I am afraid, far from respectable nereids. Then, since
one easily tires of goldfish, we strolled away in search of livelier
entertainment.

But mum was still the word. Fifty yards away we found an open-air
picture show. A crowd, as fishily dumb as the young dancers, stood or
squatted in front of an illuminated screen, across which there came and
went, in an epileptic silence, the human fishes of a cinema drama. And
what a drama! We arrived in time to see a man in what the lady novelists
call "faultless evening dress," smashing a door with an axe, shooting
several other men and then embracing against her will a distressed
female, also in evening dress. Meanwhile another man was hurrying from
somewhere to somewhere else, in motor cars that tumbled over precipices,
in trains that villains contrived to send full tilt into rivers --- in
vain, however, for the hurrying young man always jumped off the doomed
vehicles in the nick of time and immediately found another and still
more rapid means of locomotion. We did not stay to witness the foregone
conclusion; but it was sufficiently obvious that the man in the hurry
would find an aeroplane which would duly crash on the roof of the house
where the distressed female was being embraced against her will. He
would rush in and be just in time to prevent the consummation of a long
protracted rape. (I may add parenthetically that rape, on the cinema, is
always providentially leisurely; the villain takes things so easily that
heroes invariably have the time to drive in Straight-Eights from Salt
Lake City to New York before the virtuous resistance of the heroine can
be overcome.) The villain would then be shot and the young man and
distressed female would embrace, lengthily and with gusto, over his
carcase.

The violent imbecilities of the story flickered in silence against the
background of the equatorial night. In silence the Javanese looked on.
What were they thinking? What were their private comments on this
exhibition of Western civilisation? I wondered. In North Africa, in
India, I have also wondered. There are many races, skins of many shades;
there are the colonies of many white nations, there are protectorates
and mandated territories; there are nominally free countries that give
"concessions" --- a great variety of political institutions and subject
peoples. But there is only one Hollywood. Arabs and Melanesians, negroes
and Indians, Malays and Chinamen --- all see the same films. The crook
drama at Tunis is the same as the crook drama at Madras. On the same
evening, it may be, in Korea, in Sumatra, in the Sudan they are looking
at the same seven soulful reels of mother love and adultery. The same
fraudulent millionaires are swindling for the diversion of a Burmese
audience in Mandalay, a Maori audience in New Zealand. Over the entire
globe the producers of Hollywood are the missionaries and propagandists
of white civilisation. It is from the films alone that the untaught and
untravelled member of a subject race can learn about the superior
civilisation which has conquered and is ruling him.

And what does he learn from the films? What is this famous civilisation
of the white men which Hollywood reveals? These are questions which one
is almost ashamed to answer. The world into which the cinema introduces
the subject peoples is a world of silliness and criminality. When its
inhabitants are not stealing, murdering, swindling or attempting to
commit rape (too slowly, as we have seen, to be often completely
successful), they are being maudlin about babies or dear old homes, they
are being fantastically and idiotically honourable in a manner
calculated to bring the greatest possible discomfort to the greatest
possible number of people, they are disporting themselves in marble
halls, they are aimlessly dashing about the earth's surface in fast
moving vehicles. When they make money they do it only in the most
discreditable, unproductive and socially mischievous way --- by
speculation. Their politics are matters exclusively of personal
(generally amorous) intrigue. Their science is an affair of secret
recipes for making money --- recipes which are always getting stolen by
villains no less anxious for cash than the scientific hero himself.
Their religion is all cracker mottoes, white-haired clergymen,
large-hearted mothers, hard, Bible-reading, puritanical fathers and
young girls who have taken the wrong turning and been betrayed (the
rapes, thank goodness, are occasionally successful) kneeling with their
illegitimate babies in front of crucifixes. As for their art --- it
consists in young men in overalls and large ties painting, in cock
lofts, feminine portraits worthy to figure on the covers of magazines.
And their literature is the flatulent verbiage of the captions.

Such is the white man's world as revealed by the films, a world of
crooks and half wits, morons and sharpers. A crude, immature, childish
world. A world without subtlety, without the smallest intellectual
interests, innocent of art, letters, philosophy, science. A world where
there are plenty of motors, telephones and automatic pistols, but in
which there is no trace of such a thing as a modern idea. A world where
men and women have instincts, desires and emotions, but no thoughts. A
world, in brief, from which all that gives the modern West its power,
its political and, I like patriotically to think, its spiritual
superiority to the East, all that makes it a hemisphere which one is
proud to have been born in and happy to return to, has been left out. To
the subject races of the East and South, Hollywood proclaims us as a
people of criminals and mentally defective. It was better, surely, in
the old days before the cinema was invented when the white men's
subjects were totally ignorant of the world in which their masters
lived. It was possible for them, then, to believe that the white men's
civilisation was something great and marvellous --- something even
greater, perhaps, and more extraordinary than it really was. Hollywood
has changed all that. It has scattered broadcast over the brown and
black and yellow world a grotesquely garbled account of our
civilisation. It has published a journal of our activities, but heavily
censored. The political and scientific articles, the reviews of books,
the essays, the reports of learned societies have been cut out; there
are blanks where the reproductions of the works of art should be.
Nothing has been left but the police court news, the feuilleton, the
reports of the divorce cases. White men complain that the attitude of
the members of the coloured races is not so respectful as it was. Can
one be astonished?

What astonishes me is that the attitude remains as respectful as it
does. Standing in the midst of that silent crowd of Javanese picture
fans, I was astonished when the performance attained its culminating
imbecility, that they did not all with one accord turn on us with hoots
of derision, with mocking and murderous violence. I was astonished that
they did not all rush in a body through the town crying "Why should we
be ruled any longer by imbeciles?" and murdering every white man they
met. The drivelling nonsense that flickered there in the darkness, under
the tropical clouds, was enough to justify any outburst. But fortunately
for us, the Oriental is patient and long-suffering. He is also cautious;
for he knows, in the words of Hilaire Belloc, that

> Whatever happens, we have got
>
> The Maxim-gun, and they have not ________

"we" being the whites.

Maxim guns can check actions, but they cannot control thoughts. The
coloured peoples think a great deal less of us than they did, even
though they may be too cautious to act on their opinions. For this state
of affairs the movies are not, of course, alone responsible. The spread
of native education, the unedifying spectacle of the World War, the talk
about self-determination and the sacredness of nationality, with
promises of liberation made and never carried into effect --- these have
done much, perhaps most. But the share of Hollywood in lowering the
white man's prestige is by no means inconsiderable. A people whose own
propagandists proclaim it to be mentally and morally deficient cannot
expect to be looked up to. If films were really true to life, the whole
of Europe and America would deserve to be handed over as mandated
territories to the Basutos, the Papuans and the Andaman pygmies.
Fortunately, they are not true. We who were born in the West and live
there, know it. But the untutored mind of the poor Indian does not know
it. He sees the films, he thinks they represent Western reality, he
cannot see why he should be ruled by criminal imbeciles. As we turned,
disgusted from the idiotic spectacle and threaded our way out of the
crowd, that strange aquarium silence of the Javanese was broken by a
languid snigger of derision. Nothing more. Just a little laugh. A word
or two of mocking comment in Malay and then, once more, the silence as
of fish. A few more years of Hollywood's propaganda and perhaps we shall
not get out of an Oriental crowd quite so easily.
:::


\clearpage
