\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## GAROET {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
At this season of the year --- which, the month being March, I must call
spring, though it is never anything in Java but a more or less rainy
midsummer --- at this season the hill station of Garoet is like Paradise
from dawn till lunch-time and like Scotland all the afternoon. You wake
up each morning to find the sky pale blue, the row of jagged volcanoes
opposite your bedroom window all rosy with sunrise, the valley in the
foreground miraculously green. All morning a process of cloud-making
goes on. White mountains of vapour, more fantastically shaped even than
the rocks of Java, build themselves up behind the volcanoes, rise higher
and ever higher into the sky, throw off white islands from their summits
to float out into the welkin --- until at last after a marvellous drama of
light and shadow, a slow soundless pageant of ineffable illuminations
and solemn quenchings, the whole sky is overcast with vapours that, from
being white and sunlit, have almost suddenly turned grey, and the whole
scene below is lifeless and sad. Punctually, at about two o'clock, the
first drops fall, and from that time forward the rain comes pouring down
with undiminished violence till far into the night. The valley, the
volcanoes, the near palms and the bamboos disappear behind grey veils of
water. It is almost cold. Looking out from your veranda, you might
almost believe you were sitting somewhere on the Moor of Rannoch.

But what matters Rannoch all the afternoon, if you may walk in Eden all
the morning? Eden indeed; for the whole impossibly beautiful land is one
great garden --- but a garden on which, alas, the curse of work has fallen
most heavily. Tourists in Paradise admire; but the gardeners labour
incessantly. The tourists' white-skinned cousins duly see to that.

At Garoet we walked out each morning among the paradisiacal parterres.
Every slope was terraced and planted with rice; and at this season all
the terraces were flooded. Flights upon flights of watery steps climbed
from the valleys up the hillsides. Lovingly they followed each contour
of the hill, making visible and, as it were, underlining artistically
the advance and recession of the curving slopes. Some of the terraces
shone within their little retaining walls of clay, like mirrors of
colourless glass. In some the rice had already sprouted and the surface
of the water reflected innumerable shoots of emerald. In little
torrents, from the mouth of bamboo conduits, the water poured and
splashed.

But not all the fields were under water. In some they were growing
sugar-cane. In some they had just cut the maize. We walked by little
paths up and down through the mountainous garden. Enormous butterflies,
their brown wings eyed with staring purple; butterflies metallically
blue; orange and swallow-tailed; or richly funereal, as though they had
been cut out of black velvet; passed and repassed with the strong swift
flight of birds. In the hedges, the hibiscus flowers hung open-mouthed
and their long pistils lolled like red and furry tongues. A bush covered
with little flowers, star-shaped and many-coloured, blossomed along
every path. But brighter than the butterflies and the flowers were the
Javanese. Gaudy in their batik and fantastically patterned, they passed
along the paths, they stood working in the fields. The country swarmed
with them. And every two or three furlongs we would walk into a
village --- a hundred little houses made of bamboo and thatch and woven
matting, perched on long stilts above their artificial fish ponds (for
almost every house in Java has its muddy pool) and teeming with
copper-coloured life. Suspended from the tops of long bamboos, the tame
birds twittered in their cages. And in larger cages, raised only a few
feet above the ground, we could see through the rattan bars, not birds,
but --- astonishingly --- tall piebald sheep, one woolly prisoner in each
cage.

I have never seen any country more densely populous than Java. There are
places within thirty miles of London where one may walk for half an hour
without meeting a soul and almost without seeing a house. But in Java
one is never out of sight of man and his works. The fields are full of
industrious labourers. No village seems to be more than ten minutes'
walk from its nearest neighbours. Authentically paradisiacal, the
landscape is very far from being a "bowery loneliness." By comparison
with Java, Surrey seems underpopulated. And for once, statistics confirm
personal impressions. The best part of forty million people live on the
island --- the population of crowded Italy in a mountainous land of half
its area.

When, in the afternoons, the rain came down and I had time to do
something besides gasp with admiration at the fabulous and entirely
unbelievable beauty of the landscape, I could not help thinking about
this portentous populousness. I remembered those lines of Byron's --- if
Byron indeed it was who wrote that in every sense "curious" poem, *Don
Leon* --- those classical lines, in which the whole theory of
overpopulation is briefly and brutally summed up :---

> Come, MALTHUS, and in Ciceronian prose
>
> Show how a rutting Population grows,
>
> Until the produce of the Soil is spent,
>
> And Brats expire for lack of Aliment.

How soon the brats will start expiring in Java, I cannot say. Into what
is perhaps the most fertile country in the world, they are already
importing food. But that means very little. Agricultural methods may be
improved; new lands opened up. In the future, who knows? Java may
support eighty or a hundred, instead of a mere forty millions.

What interests me in the general problem is the particular case of the
child of talent born in the lowest strata of an excessive population.
What are his chances of living, in the first place; of developing and
extrinsicating his talents, in the second? Brats, *tout court*,
constitute the stuff of which our world is made. They may expire; but
unless they do so on such an enormous scale as to imperil the whole
fabric of society, it will make no difference to the world. Brats of
talent, on the other hand, have it in them to change the world in one
way or another. The suppression of their talent, by death or by the
unpropitious circumstances of life, deprives the world of part of its
vital principle of growth and change.

The lot of a human being born in the basements of any population,
whether excessive or small, is at the best of times unenviable. Layer
upon layer of organised society lies above them; he is buried alive
under a living tombstone whose interest it is to keep him buried. In the
West, where the standard of living is relatively high, where the State
is rich and humanitarianism is one of the principles of government, the
brat of talent is given certain chances. The State provides certain
educational levers and pulleys for lifting the tombstone. The child of
talent --- at any rate, if his talent happens to be of the
examination-passing variety --- can worm his way up quite early in life
from the pit into which he was born.

But in the East universal primary education does not exist, the State is
not run on humanitarian principles, and, even if it were would be too
poor to provide the brats of talent with the costly machinery for
lifting the tombstone. Nor, perhaps, are the brats even conscious of a
desire to climb out of their grave. The bands of ancient custom are
wound round them like a shroud; they cannot move, they do not wish to
struggle. And then, consider the weight of the tombstone. In China, in
India it lies like a pyramid upon them. Even if he should survive
infancy --- and in an Oriental city anything from three to nine hundred of
every thousand children die before completing their first year --- how can
the brat of talent hope, unaided, to lift the pyramid? Choirs of mute
Miltons, whole regiments of guiltless Cromwells are without doubt at
this moment quietly putrefying in the living graves of China and
lower-caste India.

Java, like all the other Malayan countries, evolved no civilisation of
its own, and its barbarous record, so different from the splendid
histories of China and India, does not authorise us to believe it
fertile in men of talent. Still who knows what genius may not by chance
be buried under the thick layers of its population? In the pyramid above
the grave of talent there are the best part of forty million stones. If
I were a Javanese patriot, I should have that all too efficaciously
fertilising cannon at Batavia surreptitiously dragged from its place by
the Penang Gate and thrown into the sea.
:::


\clearpage
