\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## BUITENZORG {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
There are days in our northern winter, still days, windless, sunless
and, from morning to evening twilight, uniformly illumined under a
white-grey sky, days when the whole bare country seems to glow, or to be
just on the point of glowing, with an intensity of suppressed colour. It
is as though a brown and earthy light were striving to break from under
the clods of every ploughland; the green of the winter grass is a
sulking emerald; and the leafless trees and hedges, which seem at first
glance merely black, are seen by the more discerning eye as the all but
opaque lanterns through which a strange, strong, quivering radiance of
deepest plum colour is almost vainly shining.

In the Botanical Gardens at Buitenzorg, I found myself unexpectedly
reminded --- in spite of the pervasive greenness, the palms, the fantastic
flowers --- of a winter scene in England. For the strong sullen
illumination, which I have tried to describe and which is so
characteristic of our December landscapes, was the same as that which
lay on these tropical gardens. Under the white dead sky, the colours
potentially so much stronger than any that are seen in our more rarefied
landscapes, shone with a dark intensity, muffled yet violent, as though
resentful of their suppression. We walked enchanted, but in a kind of
horror, under huge trees, heavy with foliage that seemed as though
darkly and morbidly suffused with an excess of coloured life.

And when at last the sun came out, how unrestrainedly, with what a
savage and immoderate exultation, the gardens responded to its greeting!
The hard and shiny leaves reflected the light as though they had been
made of metal, and burnished. On every tree there hung, according to the
shape, the size and growth of its leaves, a multitude of shining
sequins, of scythes and scimitars, of daggers and little ingots, a
hundred various forms of colourless and dazzling sunshine. And where the
leaves did not look towards the sun, their colour, stripped by the light
of all the veils which the clouds had wrapped about it, glared out in
all its intensity: the violent blue-tinged emerald of equatorial
foliage.

****

There is a certain type of ingenious mind to which the function of
decorative and applied art is simply and solely to make one object look
like ancther and fundamentally different object. Wordsworth's Needlecase
in the form of a Harp is classical. The same perverse ingenuity has
begotten and is still begetting monsters as silly.

Personally, I have a weakness for these absurdities. I love the stucco
that mimics marble, the washstands in the form of harpsichords, the
biscuit boxes that look like Shakespeare's Complete Works tied together
with an embroidered ribbon. My affection for these things prepared me to
feel a special admiration for the flora of the equator. For the special
and peculiar charm of tropical botany is that you can never be quite
sure that it isn't zoology, or arts and crafts, or primitive religion.
There are lilies in Malaya whose petals have become attenuated to
writhing tentacles, so that they dangle on their stalks like perfumed
spiders. There are palms whose fruits are vegetable porcupines. Dessert
in Java is an affair of scarlet sea-urchins and baked potatoes: open the
first --- it contains the semblance of a plover's egg, hard boiled and
peeled of its shell; and the potato proves to be full of a purplish
custard flavoured with sherry, turpentine and chocolate. There are
orchids in Singapore that might be pigeons, and others from which one
recoils instinctively as though from the head of a snake. The gardens of
the equator are full of shrubs that bloom with votive offerings to the
Great Mother, and are fruited with coloured Easter eggs, lingams and
swastikas. There are trees whose stems are fantastically buttressed to
look like specimens of a late and decadent Gothic architecture; banyans
pillared like the nave of a basilica; *Fici Elastiae* that trail the
ropes and halters of a torture-chamber. There are red varnished leaves
and leaves of shiny purple that look as though they were made of
American cloth or patent leather. There are leaves cut out of pink
blotting-paper; leaves mottled like the cover of a school notebook;
leaves whose green is piped with lines of white or rose in a manner so
sketchily elegant, so daring, so characteristically "modern," that they
are manifestly samples of the very latest furniture fabrics from Paris.
:::


\clearpage
