\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## AT SEA {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
At sea I succumbed to my besetting vice of reading: to such an extent
that the sand-fringed, palm-crowned islands; the immense marmoreal
clouds that seem for ever poised, a sculptor's delirium, on the dividing
line between chaos and accomplished form; the sunsets of Bengal lights
and emeralds, of primroses and ice-cream, of blood and lampblack; the
dawns when an almost inky sea, reflecting the Eastern roses from its
blue-black surface, turns the colour of wine; the stars in the
soot-black sky, the nightly flashings of far-away storms beneath the
horizon, the green phosphorescence on the water --- all the lovely
incidents of tropical seafaring float slowly past me, almost unobserved;
I am absorbed in the ship's library.

Ships' libraries, I suppose, are bought either by length or by weight.
Stones of prime fiction, yards of romance fill the shelves. The chief
steward's key releases from their glass cages books which on land one
never sees, one hardly dreams of: books about cow-punchers and sweet
American heroines, all in the Great Open Air; more serious and touching
novels about heroes who are misunderstood, who have appearances against
them and are suspected, oh! quite unjustly, of cohabiting with pure
young ladies, and who are too virtuously proud to explain, until they,
the heroines and every one else concerned have been put to the greatest
possible inconvenience; sociological novels about the Modern Girl, the
Poor, Night Life in London and a Decent Day's Work for a Decent Day's
Wage; innumerable nondescript tales that end, instead of beginning, with
long slow kisses and arrangements for the wedding. Amazing works!
Drifting through the tropics, I read them at the rate of three a day and
found the process a liberal education.

Sometimes, surprisingly, one finds a real book, buried like a hard
precious pebble in the spiritual mud of the ship's library. A real book.
The discovery comes as a shock. One feels like stout Cortez, or Robinson
Crusoe confronted by the footprints, or Dr. Paley when he picked up that
symbolical half-hunter in the desert. What is it? How did it get there?
By accident or design? In certain cases the questions admit of
speciously satisfying answers. Those George Eliots, for example, so
common in the Eastern seas --- those can be easily accounted for by the
hypothesis of a new edition, overprinted and remaindered. And perhaps
the mere cheapness of the Everyman volumes would explain more than one
appearance of Macaulay's *History*. Nor should one be too much
astonished at finding Anatole France on the ships of the Rotterdam
Lloyd; for the Dutch are polyglots and believe in culture. Miraculously
so, as I discovered earlier in my wanderings. In Kashmir I met a young
and charming Dutch lady who had just returned from a six months' journey
of exploration in Chinese Turkestan. We were introduced, entered into
conversation; she began talking, judiciously and in a flawless English,
about my last novel. I was extremely gratified; but at the same time I
was overwhelmed. If ever I go to Chinese Turkestan, I shall return, I am
afraid, as deeply ignorant of contemporary Dutch fiction as I was before
I started. But if the presence of *Tha√Øs* among the Dutch was
explicable, the presence of Edmund Gosse's *Diversions of a Man of
Letters* in the library of a small Australian vessel was almost
terrifyingly unaccountable. And how on earth did the *Howard's End* of
E. M. Forster introduce itself into the coastwise traffic of Burma and
Malaya? How was it that Mark Rutherford became a passenger from Sandakan
to Zamboanga? And why, oh why, was Bishop Berkeley travelling from
Singapore with his almost eponymous namesake of *The Rosary*? After the
first disquieting bewilderment, I accepted the books with thankfulness,
and whenever I needed a little holiday from my studies in popular
fiction, turned to them for rest and refreshment.

Among the genuine books which I discovered imbedded in a ship's library
was Henry Ford's *My Life and Work*. I had never read it; I began, and
was fascinated. It is easy enough in a book to apply destructive common
sense to the existing fabric of social organisation and then, with the
aid of constructive common sense, to build up the scattered pieces into
a more seemly whole. Unsystematically and in a small way I have done the
thing myself. I know how easy it is. But when Ford started to apply
common sense to the existing methods of industry and business he did it,
not in a book, but in real life. It was only when he had smashed and
rebuilt in practice that he decided to expound in a book the theory of
his enormous success.

It was somewhere between the tropic and the equator that I read the
book. In these seas, and to one fresh from India and Indian
"spirituality," Indian dirt and religion, Ford seems a greater man than
Buddha. In Europe, on the other hand, and still more, no doubt, in
America, the Way of Gautama has all the appearance of the way of
Salvation. One is all for religion until one visits a really religious
country. There, one is all for drains, machinery and the minimum wage.
To travel is to discover that everybody is wrong. The philosophies, the
civilisations which seem, at a distance, so superior to those current at
home, all prove on a close inspection to be in their own way just as
hopelessly imperfect. That knowledge, which only travel can give, is
worth, it seems to me, all the trouble, all the discomfort and expense
of a circumnavigation.
:::


\clearpage
