\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## MIRI, SARAWAK {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
It was on the point of raining when we anchored off Miri. The grey sky
hung only a few feet above our masts; the sea below us was like grey
oil, and between the ceiling of shifting vapours and the slowly heaving
floor the air was unbreathable, like the steam of a hot bath. Half a
mile away across the swell lay the land. The dark green forest came down
to the water; and in little clearings, conquered from the trees, we
could see a few dozens of European bungalows, a score or two of
miniature Eiffel Towers marking the site of the oil wells which have
called Miri into existence, a few cylindrical oil tanks, like white
martello towers dotted along the coast. Out at sea, opposite a cluster
of these white drums, a steamer lay at anchor; she was loading a cargo
of oil from the submarine pipe-line, through which the wealth of Miri is
pumped into the tankers that take it to the outer --- the real --- world.
Beyond the near dark promontory on the right we could see, far off and
sun-illumined, a range of fantastically jagged mountains.

Grey sky, grey sea, the forest, the oil wells in the forest, the little
houses among the ever-encroaching trees, and beyond them, far away
through the dim hot air, the jagged mountains of Borneo --- it was
mournful and sinister, abysmally unreal, the landscape of a dream, of a
bad dream at that. Then the rain began to fall, a few warm drops, then a
shower; the mountains became the ghosts of themselves, faded, faded and
were gone. The shower quickened to a downpour, and even the near coast,
the oil wells and the dolls' bungalows, even the black-green forest
disappeared. Walled in by falling water, we found ourselves at the
centre of a little universe, whose extremest limits were not a furlong
distant. It was a lively world; for in spite of the rain our steamer
continued to unload its cargo into the attendant lighters. A good deal
of the cargo consisted of pork --- in a potential and still living
form --- for the consumption of the Chinese coolies working on the oil
fields. Each pig was separately and closely packed in a rattan basket,
significantly shaped like the sausages into which its tenant was to be
so soon transformed. These wicker sausages, with their living sausage
meat inside them and visible between the bars, were swung out, ten at a
time, by the crane and dropped into the lighter. Three or four coolies
were ready to untie the bale and arrange the separate baskets, layer by
layer, in the wallowing barge. By the time it was fully loaded, there
must have been six or seven successive strata of pig in the lighter.
There was little squealing or struggling inside the baskets; for when
unloading day arrives, the Chinese take the precaution of putting a dose
of opium in the pigs' breakfast. It was only when the crane let them
drop with a particularly violent bump that the drugged beasts wriggled
or uttered a grunt. Mostly they lay quite still, dosing and perhaps
deliciously dreaming through the entire operation of being swung through
the air, let fall and dumped or rolled into place above, between, below
their fellows.

The spectacle was curious and, though not precisely pleasing, certainly
less deplorable than that which the man-handling of animals generally
affords. The pigs might be tossed about; but plunged, like so many De
Quinceys, in a trance of opium, they were not aware of it. They might be
closely packed --- much more closely, indeed, than they could have been
packed if they had been free and struggling --- but, stretched within
their sausages of rattan, they were neither crushed nor suffocated. In a
space where, unprisoned, no more than twenty pigs could have stood, and
that to the greatest possible discomfort of each squealing victim, a
hundred were now conveniently packed. By means of opium and baskets the
Chinese have solved a problem in humanitarianism as well as economics.
:::


\clearpage
