\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## LABUAN {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
There had been squabblings between the deck passengers and the crew. We
Olympians of the saloon were aware of it only by a dim and remote
hearsay. But the fact was so true that, when we put in at Labuan, the
Captain thought it necessary to pay off the two worst offenders among
his Malay sailors and turn them off the ship. They took their pay, and
one of them quietly departed; the other refused to move.

We saw him at a later stage of the proceedings --- a young man with a face
like a copper statue's, a body classically built and dressed in the
height of Malay fashion. A superb specimen of humanity --- but he simply
wouldn't leave the ship.

The Captain sent for the dock police. Two of them, looking very smart in
khaki uniform, came on board, took a good look at the young man, who sat
crouched in a dark corner, sullenly ruminating his grievances, and
having looked, retired. A little later four more policemen joined them,
and, standing at a safe distance, the six representatives of law and
order cajolingly implored the young man to come quietly. Nothing, they
pointed out, was going to be done to him; he was only being asked to
leave the ship; he had a right to a free passage back to Singapore. The
young man said nothing, or only growled like a tiger. Discouraged, the
policemen reported to the Captain that they would have to go and fetch
the Resident in person: the affair was too serious for them to deal with
unsupported. They trooped away. Still squatting in his corner, the young
man continued to chew his bitter and maddening cud of grievance.

We, being strangers to Malaya, began to wonder, rather impatiently --- for
the obstinate young man was delaying our departure --- why something
decisive was not done about him. Nor could we understand the obvious
apprehensiveness of the deck passengers and crew, the look of anxiety on
the faces of the officers. In our countries men value life --- their own,
if not other people's. Even desperate criminals will generally come
quietly when they are cornered. To shoot and, sooner or later, be shot,
or hanged, would be easy. But the respect and desire for life are too
strong in them; rather than violently resist, they acknowledge defeat
and go off resignedly to take the unpleasant consequences of it. The
Malay, on the contrary, can easily work himself up into a state of mind
in which all life, including his own, seems to him valueless, when the
keenest pleasure and the highest duty are to kill and be killed. Our
young obstinate, crouching in his corner and ruminating his grievances,
was busily preparing himself to run *amok* at the slightest provocation
from his enemies. The six policemen, the deck passengers, the crew, the
officers --- all knew it. The officers, indeed, had reasons for knowing it
particularly well. For it was only a short time before that, on a ship
belonging to the same company as ours, a Malay seaman had run *amok*,
for some trivially inadequate reason, and killed upwards of a dozen
people, including the Captain of the vessel. The Captain, it seems, was
a kindly old gentleman with a snowy beard and Christian principles. He
was sent for when the trouble began, and found the Malay knife in hand,
and bloody. Instead of his revolver, he used persuasion. He
remonstrated, he begged the Malay to be reasonable and give up his
knife. The Malay replied by sticking it into his body. The deck looked
like the last act of an Elizabethan tragedy before he was finally shot
down.

We had not heard this story at the time. Ignorance is bliss, and we
regarded our obstinate Malay as a rather tiresome joke and wondered why
every one else took him so preposterously seriously.

The Resident came at last; his forces amounted now to no less than nine
policemen. It was the critical moment; the general anxiety was at its
height. Would the young heathen be got off the boat without the shedding
of blood? The pockets of the Captain's jacket were weighed down with
firearms; the Resident's trousers bulged about the hip. To have produced
the pistols prematurely would have been infallibly to provoke the
Malay's insane fury. To pull them out too late would be no less fatal.
And to fire them at all in a small and crowded ship would be a danger in
itself. The situation, for those who understood it and were responsible
for its developments, was disagreeably ticklish. Ignorant, we looked on
in amusement. And luckily our attitude turned out to be the right and
appropriate one; the drama ended as a comedy, not in blood.

When the nine policemen went below to apprehend him, the Malay slipped
past them and came bounding up the companion-ladder on to the promenade
deck. He probably had an idea that, if he did come to running *amok*, it
would be better to kill first-class Christian passengers than
third-class Moslems and devil-worshippers. But he had not yet quite
succeeded in warming himself to *amok* heat. Arrived on the top deck,
the forces of law and order at his heels, he glared about him, but did
nothing. There was a brief colloquy with the Captain and the Resident.
He stood there obstinate; he continued to shake his head. He was
waiting, no doubt, for the divine afflatus that would send him
ecstatically slashing and stabbing among the infidels. But the spirit of
holy murder was slow to descend. The Resident saw his opportunity,
nodded to his men; simultaneously the nine policemen jumped on him. The
Malay made a grab for the dagger in his belt; but the spirit of murder
had arrived too late. The nine had him fast. In another moment the
handcuffs were round his wrists.

The strained expression dissolved from every face. Cigarettes were
lighted, men began to smile, to laugh and talk. And even the handcuffed
captive suddenly became good-humoured. The ferocious young savage, who
had been on the verge of murder and self-destruction, was transformed,
as soon as it ceased to be possible for him to run amok, into a merry
boy. He spoke to the policemen, he laughed; and they, in the profundity
of their sense of relief, laughed back at him, patted him on the
shoulder, loved him. He was led off, almost a hero, down the gangway. In
the midst of his escort, and followed by all the children and idlers of
the town, he marched away down the road, towards the police
station --- the most important man, that afternoon, in Labuan.

The incident, for us, was almost enjoyable. It would have seemed a good
deal less amusing if we had heard before, instead of afterwards, the
story of the kindly old Captain, stabbed, with a dozen others, on his
own ship, within five miles of Singapore.

The citizen of a law-abiding country, whose forty millions commit each
year fewer crimes of violence than are committed in the single city of
Chicago, I realised suddenly and forcibly the precarious artificiality
of all that seems most solid and fundamental in our civilisation, of all
that we take for granted. An individual has only to refuse to play the
game of existence according to the current rules to throw the
rule-observing players into bewildered consternation. There is a rule
against violence, against taking the law into our own hands; it is a
rule which most of us observe --- so many, indeed, that a great number of
people go through life accepting orderliness and non-violence as part of
the scheme of nature. When somebody comes into their orbit who plays the
game according to "the good old rule, the simple plan" --- that is,
according to no rule --- they are appalled, they are at a loss what to do,
they are helpless.

The War did something to alter men's attitude towards the rules, but
much less than might have been expected. Men went into the fighting line
not, as our generals love to say when they make speeches to public
school boys, because "Man is a Fighting Animal," but because they were
law-abiding citizens obediently doing what the State told them to do. It
was the duty of the soldier to commit violence and murder upon his
country's enemies; but he did these things under orders, and the doing
of them hardly impaired his normal law-abidingness. Considering the fact
that, for four years, half the grown men in Europe were engaged in
trying to murder one another, one can only be astonished that the
post-war increase in crimes of violence has not been vastly greater.
That it has not is a proof of how deeply the habit of playing according
to the rules has become ingrained in us. In America, the greatest part
of which is removed by only a couple of generations from the medi√¶val
epoch of pioneering, the habit of playing according to the rules has not
had time to become so deeply ingrained as in the countries whose Middle
Ages of uncontrolled and lawless violence are five hundred years away.
Lynching, the Ku Klux Klan, ferocious strike-breaking are American
institutions, the product of American history. In England, where men
abandoned the right to take the law into their own hands some two or
three hundred years ago, they would be almost unthinkable. Even crime is
less bloodthirsty on our side of the water; and the wholesale murderous
banditry that has filled the streets of American cities with armoured
cars and sharpshooters is all but unknown with us. We are fortunate in
our history. How profoundly fortunate, this absurd, but potentially
tragical, incident at Labuan caused me intimately to realise.

***

No good pictures have ever been painted, so far as I am aware, of
tropical landscapes. There are two good reasons for this, which the
first is that no good painters have ever worked in the tropics. True,
the temples of Ceylon, the ghats at Benares, Penang harbour, the palms
and fantastic volcanoes of Java are annually reproduced in fifty
thousand water-colours. But they are the water-colours of amateurs. We
have all seen them. They are the stuff that oleographs are made of. If
it were not for the fact that they kept their creators harmlessly busy
and contented, they ought to be put down by law. The tropics and the
East are given over to amateurs. Practically every tourist who travels
through them carries a paint-box. But how few serious and competent
professionals ever accompany these tourists. It is difficult indeed to
think of any who have ever crossed the Line. Professional painters of
merit are generally poor, and their absence from the tropics may be due
in part to their poverty. But poverty is not an insuperable barrier to a
determined artist, and the real reason, I believe, why painters avoid
the tropics is that they know them to be unpaintable. In this intrinsic
unpaintableness consists the second and most adequate reason for the
non-existence of decent pictures of tropical scenery.

It is a significant fact that the scenery which the enthusiastic amateur
finds most picturesque, most richly "paintable" --- it is a favourite word
of water-colouring spinsters --- is the scenery most carefully avoided by
serious professionals. Turner is one of the few great landscape-painters
who ever chose to represent picturesque subjects. The rest have always
preferred to meditate before more ordinary, less spectacular scenes.
Italy offers extravagant beauties; but the English have obstinately gone
on painting in the placid home counties of their own islands; the French
have never wandered farther than to the bare hills of Provence; the
Flemings have found their subjects within a hundred miles of Antwerp;
the Dutch have stuck to their polders and estuaries. Strange at first
sight, the phenomenon is easily explained. A picturesque landscape
(which is, by definition, a landscape naturally possessing some of the
qualities of a man-made picture) is one which inevitably imposes itself
on the painter. In the face of its overwhelming grandiosities, its
naturally dramatic character, its ready-made composition, he finds
himself being reduced to the role of a merely passive recording
instrument. That is all very well for the amateurs. A picturesque
landscape excuses them from making any creative gesture of their own;
all they have to do is to sit down and faithfully copy. But the serious
painter does not want to be imposed upon by his subject; he wants to
impose himself on it. He does not want to be excused from making an
effort of his own. On the contrary, he feels impelled by his talent to
make the creative gesture which moulds the chaos of the world into an
ordered and human cosmos --- which turns nature into art. That is why he
avoids the rich, the picturesque, the imposing, the dramatic. He wants a
plain, and almost neutral subject, on which he can impress his own human
ideas of composition and harmony, his own conception of the grand and
the dramatic. The quiet English downland is less definitely formed than
the prodigious landscapes of the Alban Hills; Flanders and the lower
Seine are more malleable, so to speak, more amenable to artistic
treatment, than the Bay of Naples; Delft is more easily digested by the
intellect than Tivoli. Turner, it is true, could swallow Italy and turn
it into art; but then he was a kind of spiritual ostrich. Most painters
prefer a lighter diet.

What is true of Italian is true, *a fortiori*, of tropical landscape.
The picturesqueness of the most "paintable" parts of the tropical Orient
is so excessive, that the serious artist must feel, when confronted with
them, as though he were being bullied, robbed of his initiative,
dictated to. He might enjoy looking at Java or Borneo; but he would
never dream of painting there. If he wanted subjects to paint he would
go back to Essex or Normandy.

Tropical landscapes, besides being too picturesque to be turned into
good pictures, are also too rich. Things in this part of the world have
a way of being unmanageably thick on the ground. There is no room in a
painting for the profusion that exists in tropical reality. The painter
of the average tropical scene would have to begin by leaving nine-tenths
of reality out of his picture. That was what Gauguin, one of the few
good painters who ever practised in the tropics, habitually did. If he
had not, there would have been no seeing the wood for the inordinate
quantity of the trees.

The various aspects of the tropical world still await their
interpreters. A hundred admirable painters have taught us to know what
European landscapes really look like. But the artistic essence of the
tropical Orient remains to be distilled. Java awaits its Gainsborough
and its Constable; Benares its Caneletto. Sportsmen are plentiful in the
Malayan forests, and sometimes they carry sketch-books as well as
rifles. But the Corot who will tell us how those forests should be seen
has not yet walked among their green and leech-infested shadows. We are
compelled to see the tropics either in terms of the snapshot, the
amateur's imitation of the oleograph or of the steamship company's
poster. Palm trees, Reckitt's blue sky, and ocean, purple mountains,
silver or golden sands --- as far as it goes, the steamship poster (which
is at least the work of a professional) is remarkably truthful. When I
saw the immense *Laconia* steaming into the harbour of Labuan, I could
have believed myself in a London tube station, looking at the
advertisements of winter cruises in the South Seas. But there is
something more subtly and essentially real to be got out of the tropics
than the amateur's water-colour and the steamship poster --- something
which we can all dimly recognise, but to which no professional seer has
yet taught us to give a definite outline. English landscapes were
beautiful before Gainsborough was born, and men were moved by the
contemplation of their beauty; but it was Gainsborough who made the
loveliness clearly visible, who gave it a name and a definition.

The best pictures of the tropics are in books. There is more of the
essence and the inward reality of the tropics in a book by Conrad or
Herman Melville, more in a good passage by H. M. Tomlinson, more even in
the rather maudlin Pierre Loti than in any existing painting of the
places they describe. But description, even the description of the most
accomplished writers, is very unsatisfying and inadequate. And it is no
use practising symbolical evocations on those who have never seen the
realities, which it is desired to evoke. For those who have eaten a
mutton pie, it is all very well to speak of "dreams of fleecy flocks,
pent in a wheaten cell." But we may be quite sure that the congenital
vegetarian would never succeed, with the help of only this recipe, in
preparing the homely dish. The art of evocation is an admirable one; but
when there is nothing in the reader's mind to be evoked, it is practised
in vain. It is no use whistling to a dog which isn't there. Symbolical
evocation will never create a true picture of the tropics in the minds
of those who have passed their lives in Bayswater. No, the only way of
explaining to those who have never been there --- as well as to those who
have --- what the tropics are really like, would be to distil them into
pictures. The thing has never been done, and it seems to me quite
probable, for the reasons I have already given, that it never will be.
:::


\clearpage
