\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## KUDAT, NORTH BORNEO {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The steamers from Singapore call at all the principal ports of British
North Borneo. But the tourist who supposes that he will be able, at
those places, to study those romantic beings "the Wild Men of Borneo,"
is profoundly mistaken. At Kudat, it is true, we actually did see two
small and dirty people from the interior, hurrying apprehensively along
the relatively metropolitan street of that moribund little port as
though in haste to be back in their forests. Poor specimens they were;
but we had to be content with them. They were the nearest approach to
wild men we had seen or were destined to see, the only genuine and
aboriginal Borneans. For the rest, we saw only Chinese. Except for a few
Englishmen they are the sole inhabitants of the ports. Labuan and
Jesselton, Kudat and Sandakan are merely Chinese colonies. And behind
the ports, in the land that has been conquered from the forest --- there
too they are to be found. With the Javanese they work the big
company-owned plantations, they cultivate small holdings of their own.
And everywhere the shopkeepers, the merchants are Chinese. It is the
same all over the archipelago and in the Malay peninsula. Not European
capital so much as Chinese labour and perseverance is developing the
East Indies. Abolish the Chinese, and European colonisation would be
impossible. Or at least it would be a merely platonic and honorary
colonisation. Flags might be planted without the assistance of the
Chinese --- but not rubber. It is pleasant, no doubt, it is
soul-satisfying to look at the coloured bunting flapping in the tropical
breeze. But it is still pleasanter to draw dividends. For this keener
pleasure Europeans must thank the Chinamen.
:::


\clearpage
