\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## SANDAKAN {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Sandakan, like Jesselton, Kudat and, I suppose, all the other sea-coast
towns of North Borneo, is a Chinese colony governed by a few white men
inhabiting the bungalows in the suburbs. It is a picturesque place, has
a marvellous natural harbour with a great red rock, like a second
Gibraltar, to guard its entrance, and is the port and capital of a
little hinterland of cocoanut groves, rubber and tobacco plantations. A
club-house and a golf course proclaim it to be, if not a part of the
British Empire, at least a protectorate. (Examined in detail and at
close quarters, our far-flung Empire is seen to consist of several
scores of thousands of clubs and golf courses, dotted at intervals, more
or less wide, over two-fifths of the surface of the planet. Large blond
men sit in the clubs, or swipe the white ball down clearings in the
jungles; blackamoors of various shades bring the whisky and carry round
the niblicks. The map is painted red. And to the casual observer, on the
spot, that is the British Empire.) But to return to Sandakan. Besides a
club and a golf course, it possesses four steam-rollers and a superbly
metalled road, eleven miles long. At the eleventh milestone, the road
collides with what seems an impenetrable wall of forest and comes
abruptly to an end. You get out of your car and, examining the wall of
verdure, find it flawed by a narrow crevice; it is a path. You edge your
way in and are at once swallowed up by the forest. The inside of Jonah's
whale could scarcely have been hotter, darker or damper. True, the
jungle monster sometimes opens its mouth to yawn; there is a space
between the trees, you have a glimpse of the sky, a shaft of thick
yellow sunlight comes down into the depths. But the yawns are only brief
and occasional. For the greater part of our stroll in the belly of the
vegetable monster, we walked in a hot twilight. It was silent too. Very
occasionally a bird would utter a few notes --- or it might have been a
devil of the woods, meditatively whistling to himself, as he prepared
some fiendishly subtle and ingenious booby trap to terrify the human
trespassers on his domain.

Nature is all very well half-way to the pole. Kept on short rations, she
behaves decorously. But feed her up, give her huge doses of the tonic
tropical sunlight, make her drunk with tropical rain, and she gets above
herself. If Wordsworth had been compelled to spend a few years in
Borneo, would he have loved nature as much as he loved her on the banks
of Rydal Water? If the *Excursion* had been through equatorial Africa,
instead of through Westmoreland, old William's mild pantheism would have
been, I suspect, a little modified.

It was with a feeling of the profoundest relief that I emerged again
from the green gullet of the jungle and climbed into the waiting car.
The Chinese chauffeur started the machine and we drove away, very slowly
(for in Sandakan you hire a car by the hour, not by the mile; the
drivers are marvellously cautious) we drove positively majestically down
the eleven-mile road. I thanked God for steam-rollers and Henry Ford.
:::


\clearpage
