\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## THE SOUTHERN PHILIPPINES {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The Dutch and English were never such ardent Christians that they
thought it necessary to convert, wholesale and by force, the inhabitants
of the countries which they colonised. The Spaniards, on the contrary,
did really believe in their extraordinary brand of Catholic
Christianity; they were always crusaders as well as freebooters,
missionaries as well as colonists. Wherever they went, they have left
behind them their religion and with it (for one cannot teach a religion
without teaching many other things as well) their language and some of
their habits.

The Philippines were Spanish for upwards of three hundred years. They
were neglected, it is true, they were governed at one remove, through
Mexico; still they were Spanish. That is a fact of which you become
aware the moment you set foot on the island of Sulu, the southernmost
and, as it happens, the least Hispaniolised and Christian of the
Philippines. At Zamboanga you are made more certain of it. At Manila it
is fairly drummed into you. The landscape is familiarly tropical and
East Indian. (Sulu is like a miniature Java, impossibly beautiful.) But
the world into which you have stepped --- you realise it at once --- is
unlike anything of which you have yet had experience in the equatorial
Orient. It is Spain --- diluted, indeed, distorted, based on Malayan
savagery and overlaid with Americanism, but still indubitably Spain. The
Dutch have been in Java for more than three centuries. Their colonists
have freely intermarried with the natives; many have made the island
their permanent home, have lived and died there and left their families
behind them. But Java remains Javanese. The people have retained their
clothes, their language, their religion; even in the towns, at the
cosmopolitan ports, they are totally un-Dutch, just as the Malays of the
peninsula, the Dyaks and Dusuns of Sarawak and North Borneo are totally
un-English. If we had been as passionately Anglican as the Spaniards
were passionately Catholic, the urban Malays would now be wearing cotton
plus fours, talking cockney and, on Sundays, singing hymns A. and M.
But --- luckily or unluckily, I do not know --- we were only tepidly
Anglican. The Malay continues to wear his skirt, to talk Malayan, to
worship Mohammed's new-fangled Allah and the immemorial ghosts and
devils of his native forest.

Landing at Jolo (one pronounces it Holo), the capital of Sulu island, we
found ourselves in a small decaying Spanish town. There were public
gardens with fountains and a group of comically sublime and allegorical
modern statuary. A noise of nasal singing issued from a church; we
looked in and saw a choir of small brown urchins being taught by a brown
choirmaster to chant the canticles and responses. Filipino ladies,
dressed like the beauties whose portraits one sees on the inside of
cigar-box lids, swam past. Their long trailing skirts were looped up on
one side to show the under petticoat. Their bodices of stiff muslin were
amazing relics of the eighteenth century, sweepingly cut to reveal a
brown décolleté and fitted with enormous puffed sleeves, like the wings
of butterflies or the fins of some more than usually improbable kind of
tropical fish. While the girls and the younger women wore their hair
"up," their elders, preposterously, kept it hanging in a long black
cataract down their backs. As for the men, those who were not Filipinos
and wearing the most elegant of white duck suits, were dressed --- it
depended upon their tribal and national affinities --- either in
skin-tight fleshings, a gaudily coloured sash or belt, a little toreador
jacket and a coloured bandana for the head, or else --- flying to the
other sartorial extreme --- in more than Oxford, more even than Mexican
trousers of brightly coloured silk (pale pink, green, yellow, orange), a
larger sash, generally ornamented with an enormous kris, a still more
handsome bull-fighter's jacket and, over the bandana, a colossal hat.

Fantastic garments! But surely not of indigenous devising. Nowhere but
in the Philippines do the Malays dress themselves as toreadors and
cowboys. The least original of people, they have borrowed their clothes
from their conquerors and enemies. The fancy dress of the Sulus and the
fierce proud Moros, who were the Spaniards' most dangerous foes, has
been taken from a Spanish-Mexican wardrobe. And that extraordinary
swagger, those noble attitudes --- those too are Spanish. And then the
language. The country folk, of course, have never learnt it. But it
rumbles nobly in the urban streets and shops. Nor, as we discovered, is
it the Filipinos alone who speak it. We had made our way along the
rickety wooden pier on which, perched above the sea, the Chinese traders
have their shops and dwelling-houses, and were seeking to buy some of
those enormous pearl shells for which the island of Sulu is celebrated.
We found them after much searching in the back rooms of a Chinese
shop --- mountainous heaps of the shining nacreous shells. We sifted the
treasure and selected as many as we wanted. Then came the time to pay.
We turned to the Chinaman. He knew no English. Our two words of Malay
were spoken in vain. In despair we tried Spanish. He responded. English
and yellow Celestial, we conducted our little haggle in pidgin
Castilian.
:::


\clearpage
