\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## MANILA {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Manila is the capital of an American colony. That is a fact of which I
was not for long permitted to remain in doubt. Within three hours of my
landing, I had been interviewed by nine reporters, representing the
entire press, English and Spanish, of the city. I was asked what I
thought of Manila, of the Filipino race, of the political problems of
the islands --- to which I could only reply by asking my interviewers what
they thought about these subjects and assuring them, when they had told
me, that I thought the same. My opinions were considered by all parties
to be extraordinarily sound.

When this sort of thing happens --- and fortunately it very seldom happens
except on United States territory --- I am always set thinking of that
curious scale of values by which, in this preposterous world, men and
things are appraised. Take, for example, the case of the literary man.
(I am a literary man myself, and so the matter interests me.) The
literary man is invested, it seems to me, with a quite disproportionate
aura of importance and significance. Literary men fairly pullulate in
*Who's Who*. They are more numerously represented in that remarkable
book than any other class of notorieties, with the possible exception of
peers and baronets. Almost nobody who has sold five thousand copies and
had a good review in the *Times Literary Supplement*, is missing from
its pages. A dispassionate observer from Mars would be led, by a study
of *Who's Who*, to suppose that a certain gift of the gab was the most
important quality an inhabitant of this planet could possess. But is it?

Art and the artist have become tremendously important in our modern
world. Art is spoken of with respect, almost with reverence as though it
were something sacred; and every adolescent aspires to be an artist, as
regularly and inevitably as every child aspires to be an engine-driver.
Art is one of the things that have flowed in to fill the vacuum created
in the popular mind by the decay of established religion. The priest,
whose confessional functions have passed to the lawyer and the doctor,
has bequeathed his mystical prestige, his dignity as a guardian of the
sacraments, to the artist. Hence the enormous number of literary names
in *Who's Who*. Hence the interviewers who flock to ask the wandering
novelist his opinion about things of which he must necessarily be
incompetent to speak. The obscure scientist, whose mental equipment may
be incomparably superior to that of the literary man, is left in peace.
The public, being incapable of understanding what he is talking about,
takes no interest in him. He must achieve something spectacular before
hostesses ask him out and reporters come to meet him at the station. The
practical man is hardly more esteemed (unless, of course, he happens to
be immensely rich) than the man of science. To many people a man who
writes poetry (even very bad poetry) and has an opinion about
post-impressionism, is necessarily more intelligent than even a
first-class engineer, or capable official, or the organiser of a great
industry. Doctors and mill owners, government servants and lawyers can
cross the seas without running the slightest risk of being buttonholed
at every port by a crowd of newspaper men. They may be more intelligent
than the man of letters, they may be better men doing work infinitely
more valuable than his. They may be qualified by special knowledge to
speak with authority about the things which reporters love to discuss;
but they will be permitted to land unmolested. Their work lacks the
prestige which attaches to art; moreover it is private work, confined to
one place and to the actual time of its achievement. The novelist's work
is public; it exists simultaneously in many thousands of places: it can
be looked at over a long space of time --- as long indeed (if his vogue
lasts) as wood pulp can hold together.

As a mere spectator of the world, not an actor init --- one who looks on
and forms opinions of what other people are doing, but does nothing
himself --- I feel the profoundest admiration for those who act, who
impress their will on stubborn things, not merely on yielding ideas, who
wield power over men directly, and not impersonally as the writer does
by wielding power over weak words. I admire and envy; but I do not
aspire to be their rivals. Born a spectator, I should make the poorest
performer. I have a certain talent for using the opera-glasses and
making appropriate comments. I have none for acting. It is better to be
content with doing what one can do, than to make a fool of oneself by
trying to do what one can't. If I were set down to do some of the
serious practical work that has to be done in order that spectators can
watch the comedy in safety and comfort, I should behave like that
Burmese king of whom it is written in the *Glass Palace Chronicle*: "For
the sake of his concubines he composed the Paramatthabinda, that they
might know of mind and the qualities of mind, matter, nirvana, forms of
being and personality. He would not even lend an ear to the affairs of
the villages or kingdom. Whenever there was an enquiry to be made, power
exercised, or point of law determined, he caused his son, Uzana, the
heir apparent, to dispose thereof."

I admire Uzana; but oh! I understand, I sympathise with, I have a
fellow-feeling for his poor father. How infinitely pleasanter, if one
happens to be born with a speculative mind and a gift of the gab, to
chat with one's concubines about *nirvana* and the qualities of mind
than to bother oneself with the affairs of the villages! Uzana was
undoubtedly the better man; but his father, the distinguished author of
"Metaphysics in the Harem" and "Kant for Concubines" must have been the
one whom everybody wanted to meet, who received letters from distant
female correspondents, who got asked out to dinner, interviewed on the
wharf and snapshotted walking with a friend in the Park. All these
things would happen to him; and he --- for I take it that he had really
and seriously thought about the qualities of mind and the forms of
matter --- he would be astonished every time and, thinking of Uzana, he
would feel embarrassed and even rather ashamed, as though he were an
impostor.
:::


\clearpage
