\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## JAPAN {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
It was grey when we landed at Kobe, and the air was cold and smelt of
soot. There was deep mud in the streets. A little while after we had
stepped on shore, it began to rain. We might have been landing at Leith
in the height of a Scotch November.

Lifted above the mud on stilt-like clogs, little men paddled about the
streets; they were dressed in Inverness capes of grey or brown silk and
cheap felt hats. Women in dressing-gowns, with high-piled, elaborately
architectured hair, like the coiffure of an old-fashioned barmaid, dyed
black, toddled beside them, leading or carrying on their backs gaudily
dressed children, whose round expressionless button-faces were like the
faces of little Eskimos. It seemed, certainly, an odd sort of population
to be inhabiting Leith. Reluctantly we had to admit that we were indeed
in the Extreme Orient, and the flowers in the shops had to be accepted
as a sufficient proof that this funereal wintry day was really a day in
the month of Cherry Blossom.

We got into the train and for two hours rolled through a grey country,
bounded by dim hills and bristling with factory chimneys. Every few
miles, the sparse chimneys would thicken to a grove, with, round their
feet --- like toadstools about the roots of trees --- a sprawling collection
of wooden shanties: a Japanese town. The largest of these fungus beds
was Osaka.

It was late in the afternoon when we arrived at Kyoto, the ancient
capital, "the Art City of Japan" (we had been well primed before
starting with touristic literature). Declining the proffered taxi, we
climbed into rickshaws, the better to observe the town. It was only
feebly drizzling. Dressed like Anglo-Saxon messengers in blue jerkins
and tights, our coolies drew us splashing through the mud. Kyoto is like
one of those mining camps one sees on the movies, but two or three
hundred times as large as any possible Wild Western original. Little
wooden shack succeeds little wooden shack interminably, mile after mile;
and the recession of the straight untidy roads is emphasised by the long
lines of posts, the sagging electric wires that flank each street, like
the trees of an avenue. All the cowboys in the world could live in
Kyoto, all the Forty-Niners. Street leads into identical street,
district merges indistinguishably into district. In this dreary ocean of
log cabins almost the only White Houses are the hotels.

For a few hours that evening it ceased to rain. We took the opportunity
to explore the city on foot. The streets were well lighted, the
shops --- and almost every one of the hundred thousand sh√•cks in Kyoto is
a shop --- were mostly open. We walked through the city, seeing the
commercial life steadily and seeing it almost whole. It was like
walking, ankle-deep in mud, through an enormous Woolworth's bazaar. Such
a collection of the cheap and shoddy, of the quasi-genuine and the
imitation-solid, of the vulgar and the tawdry, I have never seen. And
the strange thing was that, in Kyoto, even the real, the sound, the
thoroughly *pukka* had an air of flimsiness and falsity. Looking at the
most expensive kimonos with a lifetime of wear woven into their thick
silk, you would swear that they were things of wood-pulp. The ivories
resemble celluloid; the hand embroideries have the appearance of the
machine-made article. The genuine antiques --- the ones you see in the
museums, for there are none elsewhere --- look as though they had been
fabricated yesterday. This is due partly to the fact that in recent
years we have become so familiar with the conventional forms of Japanese
art turned out on machines by the million for the penny bazaar market,
that we cannot associate them with anything but cheapness and falsity;
partly too, I think, to a certain intrinsic feebleness and vulgarity in
the forms themselves. That sobriety, that strength, that faultless
refinement which are the characteristics of Chinese art, and which give
to the cheapest piece of Chinese earthenware, the most ordinary
embroidery or carving or lettering, a magistral air of artistic
importance and significance, are totally lacking, so it seems to me, in
the art of Japan. The designs of Japanese fabrics are garish and
pretentious; the sculpture even of the best periods is baroque; the
pottery which in China is so irreproachable both in hue and shape is
always in Japan just not "right." It is as though there were some
inherent vice in Japanese art which made the genuine seem false and the
expensive shoddy.

Factories, smoke, innumerable Woolworths, mud --- were these Japan? We
were assured they were not. The "real" Japan (all countries have a
"real" self, which no stranger can ever hope to see) was something
different, was somewhere else. Looking at the celebrated Cherry Dances
in Kyoto, we were almost ready to believe it. The costumes, it is true,
were extraordinarily vulgar and garish. The scenery in Western
style --- the Western style of the pre-War provincial pantomime --- was
deplorable. Any self-respecting producer of revues in London or New York
could have staged a far more adequate Old Japan. But he could not have
got the dancing. That was an enchantment. A chorus of thirty or forty
geishas, drilled to a pitch of almost Prussian efficiency, their farded
faces impassive as white masks, performed a ballet that was the
formalisation of the gestures of courtesy, that was polite conversation
made more gracefully polite, that was the apotheosis of good manners at
the tea-table. And hardly less lovely were the movements of the
orchestra. In Europe one pays to listen to music; in Japan one pays to
see it played. When European performers make their appearance upon the
platform, one generally wants to shut one's eyes; in a Japanese concert
room, on the other hand, one desires to keep one's eyes wide open and to
close one's ears. Not that the music is unpleasant. What I heard at
Kyoto might have been the remote and geological ancestor of Russian
music. It stood in relation to Rimsky Korsakoff as pithecanthropus
stands to man; it was a kind of *ur*-Stravinsky, a fossil and primitive
form of the genus Moussorgsky. Not unpleasing, I repeat, but after a
while a little boring. The guitars, on which twenty geishas played with
plectrums that looked like ivory combs, were singularly poor in tone.
And the tambourines, the cymbals and the drums, which were being played
by twenty of their sisters on the opposite side of the hall, beat out
only the simplest and most obvious rhythms. No, the orchestra was not
much to listen to. But what a ravishment to behold! They were as well
drilled as the ballerinas. The twenty guitar players sat in identically
the same position, and when they combed the strings of their instruments
their hands performed the same movements simultaneously, as though they
were the synchronously moving parts of one machine. Similar machines
actuated the eight hour-glass-shaped tambourines, the eight small
kettle-drums, the two sets of cymbals, the two little gongs. Most
exquisite of all were the drummers. They knelt in front of their
instruments as though before a row of little gods. Each held a pair of
enormous white drumsticks, so thick that the tiny hands could hardly
grasp them. With these, in unison, they tapped the little gods before
whom they knelt; and the little drum gods answered them, boom boom --- a
response, it must be admitted, rather more clear and comprehensible than
that which deities are accustomed to vouchsafe to their worshippers. But
then the ritual of these Japanese adorers was so beautiful that it could
hardly fail to be magically compelling. Their arms, prolonged by the
enormous white drumsticks, were held out before them almost at full
stretch. And when they beat, they beat from the shoulder, lifting and
letting fall the whole arm. But "letting fall" is not the right
expression; it connotes a loose and undeliberate movement, and the
drummers did nothing undeliberately. On the contrary, each stroke was
applied with a perfectly controlled precision. Tap, tap, tap-a-tap, tap;
they touched the drum face as though they were fitting into position,
one by one, the tesserae, now large, now small, of an elaborate mosaic.

Perhaps these dancers, these exquisitely disciplined musicians, were the
"real" Japan. Perhaps, too, it existed in the country which we saw on
our way to Yokohama. The sun had come out at last. The sky was palely
blue and alive with clouds that trailed great indigo shadows across the
earth beneath them. It was an almost Italian country of abrupt hills and
lakes and mountain-encircled plains. A paler variety of our mustard was
blooming in the fields. Great expanses of primrose yellow covered the
plains to the edge of the blue lakes, to the feet of the dim blue
mountains. The mustard seemed to me far more impressively beautiful than
the cherry blossom. The near hills were brown, steep, almost bare, their
crests fringed with a growth, not of the Tuscan umbrella pine, but of
the trees which figure so largely in the native woodcuts, the ragged,
yet strangely elegant, pine trees, whose silhouette against the sky is
like a Chinese ideograph. To one familiar with the Celestial symbols,
the whole landscape, I liked to fancy, would be an open book. Wisdom and
poetry would sprout for him on every hill. Or perhaps, who knows? the
trees might just be saying, "Foreign Devil, Foreign Devil," and
repeating it monotonously, mile after mile. The second, I am afraid, is
the more probable hypothesis.

We rolled on, through miles of innumerable little rice fields
laboriously embanked to hold the water with which they were being
flooded; among sloping plantations of tea shrubs, round and shinily
green, like bushes of clipped box; through luminous plains of mustard
and young green corn; past villages of thatched houses beautifully set
among the trees. And every twenty miles or so, we would catch glimpses
of a thing which seemed, at first, only a white cloud among the clouds
of the horizon, a pale small ghost, but a ghost which, at every glimpse,
became more definite, clearer, larger, until --- hours after we had had
our earliest sight of it --- it stood shining high above us, a huge white
cone, girdled with clouds, a miracle of regular and geometrical form
among the chaotic hills which it overtopped, the sacred mountain of
Japan, Fujiyama. We saw it first at noon, a tiny cloud melting into the
clouds; and at sunset we were looking back on it, an enormous mass
rising clear of all vapours, naked and perfect, into the coloured sky.
Was this the "real" Japan? I suppose so.

But a little later, at Yokohama, we were plunged again, head over ears,
into the unreal. If Kyoto looks like a mining camp, Yokohama after the
earthquake looks like a mining camp that has not yet been finished.
There are dust-heaps among the shanties, there are holes in the
roadways, there are unbuilt bridges. But in a little while, when the
mass is all cleared up and the damage repaired, it will be just like
Kyoto --- miles of dreary ill-kept roads, hundreds of thousands of ugly
little wooden shanties, and every shanty a shop and every shop a
Woolworth. But there are differences of quality, there is a higher and a
lower, even among Woolworths. At Kyoto the shops had looked like
three-penny bazaars. At Yokohama they were only penny ones.

We boarded our ship with thankfulness. "Real" Japan had been delightful.
But there had been more of the unreal than of the real, and the unreal,
moreover, was obviously so much the more significant and important that
it had quite eclipsed the real. In every country the places, the people,
the institutions which are said by lovers of that country to constitute
its "real" self are the least characteristic and significant. Cornwall
and county families and the Anglican Church may be the esoterically
"real" England. But the England that matters, that makes history, that
impresses itself on the world and casts its shadow into the future, is
represented by Lancashire, Trade Unions and Big Business Men. It is the
same, I suppose, with Japan. Fuji and village life, traditional dances
and cultured gentlemen of leisure, are what the lovers of Japan would
have us believe to be the "real" thing. But it is the unreal Japan, the
wholesale producer of shoddy, which is at present projecting itself on
history. Not the dancers, not the cultured and religious gentlemen, but
the manufacturers of shoddy direct the country's policy. And in the
enormous mining-camp cities more and more of the Japanese are being
transformed, for good or for evil, from peasants and craftsmen into
proletarian factory hands, the brothers of all the other proletarian
workers of the world. The future of Japan, as of every other country,
depends on its "unreal" self. Some day, in the Utopian future, when
things are very different from what they are now, English and Japanese
patriots, desirous of exalting their respective countries, will point,
not to Cornwall or Fuji, not to the county families or the descendants
of the Tea Masters, but to Manchester and Osaka, to the cotton spinners
and the weavers of silk. "Here," they will say, "here is the real
England, the real Japan." Progress may be defined in this connection as
the gradual transformation of what we now call "unreal" into something
sufficiently noble and decent to be styled "real." Meanwhile we have the
misfortune to live in a world in which all that is historically
significant is so repulsive that we are compelled, if we have any pride
in our country or our human species, to practise a wholesale Christian
Science on it and deny it reality.

***

Accustomed to deploring and at the same time taking advantage of the low
standards of living current elsewhere in the East, the traveller who
enters Japan is rudely surprised when he finds himself asked to pay his
rickshaw coolie a wage which would not be despised in Europe. To travel
otherwise than by tram through the streets of a Japanese city is a
luxury. I was glad, for the sake of the rickshaw coolies, that it should
be so; for my own, I must confess, I was sorry. To the slave-owners,
slavery seems a most delightful institution.
:::


\clearpage
