\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## AT SEA {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Familiarity blunts astonishment. Fishes do not marvel at water; they are
too busy swimming in it. It is the same with us. We take our Western
civilisation for granted and find nothing intrinsically odd or
incongruous in it. Before we can realise the strangeness of our
surroundings, we must deliberately stop and think.

But moments come when that strangeness is fairly forced upon our notice,
moments when an anomaly, a contradiction, an immense incongruity is
suddenly illumined by a light so glaring that we cannot fail to see it.
Such a moment came to me as I was crossing the Pacific. It was the first
morning out of Yokohama. Coming out of my cabin, I was handed the day's
bulletin of wireless news. I unfolded the typewritten sheet and read:
"Mrs. X, of Los Angeles, girl wife of Dr. X, aged 79, has been arrested
for driving her automobile along the railroad track, whistling like a
locomotive." This piece of information had been transmitted through the
ethereal holes between the molecules of air. From a broadcasting station
more than five thousand miles away it had come to our ship in rather
less time than it would have taken the sound of my voice to travel from
one end of the promenade deck to the other. The labours of half a dozen
men of genius, of hundreds of patient and talented investigators, had
gone to creating and perfecting the means for achieving this miracle. To
what end? That the exploits of young Mrs. X, of Los Angeles, might be
instantaneously known to every traveller on all the oceans of the globe.
The ether reverberated with the name of Mrs. X. The wave that bore it
broke against the moon and the planets, and rippled on towards the stars
and the ultimate void. Faraday and Clerk Maxwell had not lived in vain.

The wise men of antiquity (so say the Indians) knew all that we have
learned about nature, and a great deal more besides. But they kept their
science to themselves, or revealed it only in enigmas which cannot be
interpreted except in the light of a previous knowledge of the answers.
They were afraid that --- men being what they are --- their discoveries
might be put to bad or futile uses. The ordinary man, they argued, is
not to be trusted with the power which comes of knowledge. They withheld
their science.

Being prejudiced in favour of the West and of the present, I have no
great belief in the scientific attainments of the ancient sages of the
Orient. But their wisdom is undeniable. The fruits of knowledge are
abused and wasted; it is, alas, only too obvious. Disinterested men have
given their lives to the search for truth, and we have turned their
discoveries to the service of murder, or employed them to create a silly
entertainment. The modern civilisation of the West, which is the
creation of perhaps a hundred men of genius, assisted by a few thousand
intelligent and industrious disciples, exists for the millions, whose
minds are indistinguishable in quality from those of the average humans
of the palæolithic age. The ideas of a handful of supermen are exploited
so as to serve the profit and pleasure of the innumerable subter-men, or
men *tout court*. The contemporary cave man listens in on instruments
which he owes to the inspired labours of superior and, by comparison,
divine intelligences. Negroid music shoots across the void into his
ears, and the wisdom of such sages as Dr. Frank Crane; racing results
and bed-time stories and the true tale of a young Mrs. X, of Los
Angeles. The fire of Prometheus is put to the strangest uses. Gods
propose, men dispose. The world in which we live may not be the best of
all possible worlds: it is certainly the most fantastic.

Not being a superman myself, I took the liveliest interest in young Mrs.
X. After being arrested for whistling like a locomotive --- whether by
means of an instrument or with the unaided vocal cords was never made
clear-she was bailed out of prison by her husband, the aged doctor. The
time came for the hearing of her case. Mrs. X told the doctor that she
proposed to forfeit her (or rather his) recognisances and run away. The
doctor protested. Mrs. X then began to smash the furniture. The aged
doctor telephoned for the police; they came, and Mrs. X was rearrested
on charges of assault. We on the Pacific waited in a dreadful suspense.
A few days later, as we were crossing the hundred and eightieth
meridian, we learned to our profound relief that a reconciliation had
taken place. Aged Dr. X had withdrawn his charge; the girl wife had gone
home quietly. What happened about the whistling business we never
learned. The anonymous powers which purvey wireless news are strangely
capricious. The name of Mrs. X no longer rippled out towards Aldeboran
and the spiral nebulae. In the next morning's bulletin there was a
little paragraph announcing the declaration of the General Strike. And
Bébé Daniels had fallen off her horse and received contusions.
:::



\clearpage
