\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## ON THE TRAIN {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
The Daylight Limited takes just twelve hours to run from San Francisco
to Los Angeles. And through what various landscapes!

First the English home counties --- a land like a park, checkered with
small ploughed fields and swelling into little hills. The little hills
became rolling downs, the downs grew larger and larger, until they were
great mountains with mile-high slopes of grass and here and there a wood
of dark evergreen trees. The mountains subsided, the land became dryer
and more barren, the grass disappeared. For an hour or two we were in a
desert --- miles upon miles of dust, fledged sparsely with the grey-leaved
growth of a parched land. We might have been in Rajputana. But there,
suddenly, on the right, was the Pacific, for ever breaking and breaking
on its desolate beaches.

"One hundred and thirteen miles along the shores of the Ocean," a
gentleman in uniform obligingly informed us, and then tried to sell us
tinted spectacles that we might contemplate the Ocean without
discomfort. "Sci-en-tifically made to exclude the ultra-violet rays. The
price is one dollar only." All day, at intervals of half an hour, he
walked up and down the train, telling us about the beauties and the
wealth of California and peddling, now postcards, now candies, now
Californian figs and oranges, now chewing-gum and True Story Magazines.
He was the only distraction on the train. In a desperation of
*désæuvrement* the passengers bought whatever he offered.

"One hundred and thirteen miles along the shores of the Ocean." Before
we had passed the hundred and thirteenth milestone, the country had
changed again --- had changed from the sea coast of Rajputana to that of
Italy. The deserts began to flourish. Groves of lemons and oranges
flanked the railway. There were vineyards, and fields of corn, and
bright flowers. Parallel with the sea, a range of elegant and florid
mountains mimicked the Apuan Alps. A little architecture, and the
illusion would have been complete. But there were no churches, no huge
pink villas among the cypresses, no castles on the hills. Nothing but
wooden shanties and little brick dog kennels, dust heaps and oil-tanks
and telegraph poles, and the innumerable motor-cars of the most
prosperous country in the world.
:::


\clearpage
