\clearpage
## LOS ANGELES. A RHAPSODY {.chapter-title}

### FIRST MOVEMENT

Daylight had come to the common folk of Hollywood, the bright
Californian daylight. But within the movie studio there shone no sun,
only the lamps, whose intense and greenish yellow radiance gives to
living men and women the appearance of jaundiced corpses. In a corner of
one huge barn-like structure they were preparing to "shoot." The camera
stood ready, the corpse-lights were in full glare. Two or three cowboys
and a couple of clowns lounged about, smoking. A man in evening dress
was trusting to his moustache to make him look like an English villain.
A young lady, so elegant, so perfectly and flawlessly good-looking that
you knew her at once for the Star, was sitting in a corner, reading a
book. The Director --- it seemed a waste that such a profile should be
*au-dessus de la mêlée* instead of in the pictures --- gave her a
courteous hail. Miss X looked up from her literature. "It's the scene
where you see the murder being committed," he explained. Miss X got up,
put away the book and beckoned to her maid, who brought her a comb and a
mirror. "My nose all right?" she asked, dabbing on powder. "Music!"
shouted the Director. "Make it emotional." The band, whose duty it is in
every studio to play the actors into an appropriate state of soul,
struck up a waltz. The studio was filled with a sea of melodic treacle;
our spirits rocked and wallowed on its sticky undulations. Miss X handed
back her powder puff to the maid and walked up to the camera. "You hide
behind that curtain and look out," the Director explained. Miss X
retired behind the curtain. "Just the hand first of all," the Director
went on. "Clutching. Then the face, gradually." "Yes, Mr. Z," came the
quiet voice of the Star from behind the hanging plush. "Ready?" asked
the Director. "Then go ahead." The camera began to purr, like a genteel
variety of dentist's drill. The curtain slightly heaved. A white hand
clutched at its edge. "Terror, Miss X," called the Director. The white
hand tightened its clutch in a spasm of cinematographic fear. The
Director nodded to the bandmaster. "Put some pep into it," he adjured.
Pep was put in; the billows of treacle rose higher. "Now the face, Miss
X. Slowly. Just one eye. That's good. Hold it. A little more terror."
Miss X heart-rendingly registered her alarm. "That's good. That's very
good. O.K." The camera stopped purring. Miss X came out from behind the
curtain and walked back to her chair. Reopening her book, she went on
quietly reading about Theosophy.

We moved on and, after halting for a few moments on our way to watch
some more terror being registered (by a man this time and under a
different Director), penetrated into the secret places of the studio. We
pronounced passwords, quoted the Manager's permission, disclaimed
connections with rival companies and were finally admitted. In one room
they were concocting miracles and natural cataclysms --- typhoons in
bathtubs and miniature earthquakes, the Deluge, the Dividing of the Red
Sea, the Great War in terms of toy tanks and Chinese fire crackers,
ghosts and the Next World. In another they were modelling prehistoric
animals and the architecture of the remote future. In cellars below
ground, mysteriously lighted by red lamps and smelling of chemicals, a
series of machines was engaged in developing and printing the films.
Their output was enormous. I forget how many thousands of feet of art
and culture they could turn out each day. Quite a number of miles, in
any case.

### SECOND MOVEMENT

Emerging, I bought a newspaper. It was Saturday's; a whole page was
filled with the announcements of rival religious sects, advertising the
spiritual wares that they would give away, or sell on the Sabbath. "Dr.
Leon Tucker with the Musical Messengers in a Great Bible Conference. 3
Meetings Tomorrow. Organ Chimes, Giant Marimbaphone, Vibraphone, Violin,
Piano, Accordeon, Banjo, Guitar and other Instruments. Wilshire Baptist
Church." The Giant Marimbaphone was certainly tempting. But in the First
Methodist Church (Figueroa at Twentieth) they were going to distribute
"Mother's Day Flowers to all Worshippers." (On Mother's Day you must
wear a red carnation if your mother is alive, a white one if she is
dead. The florists are everywhere the most ardent of matriolaters.)
Moreover they had booked the exclusive services of Dr. James H.
Maclaren, Dramatic Orator, who was going to give his well-known stunt,
"Impersonations of Lincoln and Roosevelt." "Dr. Maclaren," we were
informed, "comes with a unique, original, eloquent, instructive and
inspiring Message concerning two of our Great Presidents. Uplifting and
inspiring. It will do your soul good. The wonderful Messages of these
two Great Presidents will be brought home with new emphasis and you will
feel that you have spent the evening in the company of great Spirits.
Hear the great organ, Quartet of Artists and Vested Chorus." At the
Hollywood Congregational Church there were to be moving pictures of
Jackie Coogan in his crusade to the Near East; the prospect was a draw.
But then so was the photograph of Miss Leila Castberg of the Church of
Divine Power (Advanced Thought); her performance might not be very
interesting --- she was scheduled to preach at the Morosco Theatre on
Divine Motherhood --- but the face which looked out from her advertisement
was decidedly pleasing. Less attractive, to the devout male at any rate,
were the photos of Messrs. Clarke and Van Bruch; but the phrasing of
their ad. was enough to counteract in the mind of the reader the effect
produced by their portraits. "IT'S ON, FOLKS, IT'S ON," so the
announcement ran. "The tide is rising at an OLD-FASHIONED REVIVAL. Every
night except Monday, 7:30 P.M. Soul-stirring sermons and songs. Special
to-night! Hear 10 Evangelists --- 10. Van Bruch-Clarke Evangelistic
Party."

Jazz it up, jazz it up. Keep moving. Step on the gas. Say it with
dancing. The Charleston, the Baptists. Radios and Revivals. Uplift and
Gilda Gray. The pipe organ, the nigger with the saxophone, the Giant
Marimbaphone. Hymns and the movies and Irving Berlin. Petting Parties
and the First Free United Episcopal Methodist Church. Jazz it up! "N. C.
Beskin, the CONVERTED JEW, back from a successful tour, will conduct a
tabernacle campaign in Glendale. "WHY I BECAME A CHRISTIAN?" Dressed in
Jewish garb. Will exhibit interesting paraphernalia." Positively the
last appearance. The celebrated Farmyard Imitations. 10
Evangelists --- 10. The finest troupe of Serio-Comic Cyclists ever. Onward
Christian Soldiers. Abide with me. I'm gonna bring a watermelon to my
girl to-night.

### THIRD MOVEMENT

Mother's Day. (Mr. Herring of Indiana, "The Father of Mother's Day.")
But why not Flapper's Day? It would be more representative, more
democratic, so to speak. For in Joy City there are many more
Flappers-married as well as unmarried --- than Mothers.

> Nunc vitiat uterum quae vult formosa videri,
>
> Raraque in hoc aevo est quae velit esse parens.

Thousands and thousands of flappers, and almost all incredibly pretty.
Plumply ravishing, they give, as T. S. Eliot has phrased it, a "promise
of pneumatic bliss." Of pneumatic bliss, but of not much else, to judge
by their faces. So curiously uniform, unindividual and blank. Hardly
more expressive --- to the foreign eye, at any rate --- than any of the
other parts of that well-contoured anatomy which they are at such pains
to display.

On the beaches of the Pacific that display was indeed superb. Mack
Sennett Bathing Beauties by the hundred. They gambolled all around us,
as we walked up and down in the windy sunlight along the sands. Frisking
temptations. But we were three St. Anthonies --- Charlie Chaplin and
Robert Nichols and I --- three grave theologians of art, too deeply
absorbed in discussing the way of cinematographic salvation to be able
to bestow more than the most casual attention on the Sirens, however
plumply deserving.


### FOURTH MOVEMENT

Cocktail time. (We've dealt with the same bootlegger for upwards of two
years now. A most reliable man.). Ice rattles in the shaker --- a dance of
miniature skeletons --- and the genuinely reliable liquor is poured out.
*À boire, à boire!* Long live Pantagruel! This is dry America. We
climbed into our host's car and drove, it seemed interminably, through
the immense and sprawling city. Past movie palaces and theatres and
dance halls. Past shining shops and apartments and enormous hotels. On
every building the vertical lines of light went up like rockets into the
dark sky. And the buildings themselves --- they too had almost rocketed
into existence. Thirty years ago Los Angeles was a one-horse --- a
half-horse --- town. In 1940 or thereabouts it is scheduled to be as big
as Paris. As big and as gay. The great Joy City of the West.

And what joy! The joy of rushing about, of always being busy, of having
no time to think, of being too rich to doubt. The joy of shouting and
bantering, of dancing and for ever dancing to the noise of a savage
music, of lustily singing.

> (Yes, sir, she's my Baby.
>
> No, sir, don't say "Maybe."
>
> Yes, sir, she's my Baby now.)

The joy of loudly laughing and talking at the top of the voice about
nothing. (For thought is barred in this City of Dreadful Joy and
conversation is unknown.) The joy of drinking prohibited whisky from
enormous silver flasks, the joy of cuddling provocatively bold and
pretty flappers, the joy of painting the cheeks, of rolling the eye and
showing off the desirable calves and figure. The joy of going to the
movies and the theatre, of sitting with one's fellows in luxurious and
unexclusive clubs, of trooping out on summer evenings with fifty
thousand others to listen to concerts in the open air, of being always
in a crowd, never alone. The joy of going on Sundays to hear a peppy
sermon, of melting at the hymns, of repenting one's sins, of getting a
kick out of uplift. The joy in a word, of having what is technically
known as a Good Time.

And oh, how strenuously, how whole-heartedly the people of Joy City
devote themselves to having a Good Time! The Good Times of Rome and
Babylon, of Byzantium and Alexandria were dull and dim and miserably
restricted in comparison with the superlatively Good Time of modern
California. The ancient world was relatively poor; and it had known
catastrophe. The wealth of Joy City is unprecedentedly enormous. Its
light-hearted people are unaware of War or pestilence or famine or
revolution, have never in their safe and still half empty Eldorado known
anything but prosperous peace, contentment, universal acceptance. The
truest patriots, it may be, are those who pray for a national calamity.

On and on we drove, through the swarming streets of Joy City. (One
automobile, sir, to every three and a quarter inhabitants.) The tall
buildings impended, the lights whizzed up like rockets. On and on.
Across an open space there suddenly loomed up a large white building,
magically shining against the intensified blackness of the sky behind.
(Just finished, sir, The Temple of the Elks.) From its summit the beams
of half a dozen searchlights waved to heaven. They seemed the antennae
of some vast animal, feeling and probing in the void --- for what? For
Truth, perhaps? Truth is not wanted in the City of Dreadful Joy. For
Happiness? It is possessed. For God? But God had already been found; he
was inside the shining Temple; he *was* the temple, the brand new,
million-dollar Temple, in which at this moment the initiates of the
venerable Order of Elks were congregated to worship, not the effetely
aristocratic Lady Poverty, but plain American Mrs. Wealth. Five or six
hundred motor-cars stood parked outside the doors. What *could* those
luminous antennae be probing for? Why, for nothing, of course, for
nothing! If they waved so insistently, that was just for fun. Waving for
waving's sake. Movement is a joy and this is the great Joy City of the
West.

### FIFTH MOVEMENT

The restaurant is immense. The waiters sprint about, carrying huge
dishes of the richest food. What Gargantuan profusion! Great ten pound
chops, square feet of steak, fillets of whale, whole turkeys stewed in
cream, mountains of butter. And the barbarous music throbs and
caterwauls unceasingly. Between each juicy and satiating course, the
flappers and the young men dance, clasped in an amorous wrestle. How
Rabelais would have adored it! For a week, at any rate. After that, I am
afraid, he would have begun to miss the conversation and the learning,
which serve in his Abbey of Thelema as the accompaniment and
justification of pleasure. This Western pleasure, meaty and raw,
untempered by any mental sauce --- would even Rabelais's unsqueamish
stomach have been strong enough to digest it? I doubt it. In the City of
Dreadful Joy Pantagruel would soon have died of fatigue and boredom.
*Taedium laudamus* --- so reads (at any rate for the inhabitants of
Rabelais's continent) the triumphant canticle of Californian joy.

The restaurant is suddenly plunged into darkness. A great beam of light,
like the Eye of God in an old engraving, stares down from somewhere near
the ceiling, right across the room, squinting this way and that,
searching --- and at last finding what it had been looking for; a radiant
figure in white, the singer of the evening. A good, though not
superlatively good singer in the style of Ethel Levey or Jenny Golder.

> You gotta feed a chicken corn,
>
> You gotta feed a seal fish,
>
> You gotta feed a man (significant pause and oeillade) Love.

And so on. The enthusiasm which greets these rhymed lectures in
elementary physiology is inordinate. Being enthusiastic is a joy. We are
in Joy's metropolis.

There is a final burst of applause. The divine eyelid closes down over
God's shining eye. The band strikes up again. The dancing re-begins. The
Charleston, the fox-trot. "There is only one first-class civilisation in
the world to-day. It is right here, in the United States and the
Dominion of Canada." Monkeyville, Bryan, the Ku Klux Klan. "Europe's is
hardly second-class, and Asia's is fourth to sixth class." Jazz it up;
jazz it up! And what did late, great Ambassador Page have to say? "The
whole continent (of Europe) is rotten, or tyrannical, or yellow dog. I
wouldn't give Long Island or Moore County for the whole continent of
Europe." And with Coney Island added to Long Island and Los Angeles in
the scale along with Moore County, he might have thrown in all Asia and
the British Empire. Three cheers for Page! Yes, sir, "American idealism
has made itself felt as a great contributory force to the advancement of
mankind." Three cheers for George F. Babbitt and the Rotary Club! And
three cheers for Professor Nixon Carver! "Prosperity," the Professor has
said, "is coming to us precisely because our ideas are not
materialistic. All these things (*_e.g._*., the Elks' Temple, the jazz
bands, the movie palaces, the muffins at breakfast) are added to us
precisely because we are seeking the Kingdom of God and His
righteousness." Three cheers more --- thrice three! The Prof. deserves
them.

It is almost midnight. A few minutes and it will be the Sabbath. A few
hours and the Giant Marimbaphone will be proclaiming the glory of the
new billion dollar God. At the Ambassador Hotel (alas, too expensive for
me to stay at) Dr. Ernest Holmes will be preaching on "The Science of
Jesus." It is time to go home. Farewell, farewell. Parting is such sweet
sorrow. Did Tosti raise his bowler hat when he said "Good-bye"?
:::


\clearpage
