\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## CHICAGO {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Turning over the pages of the Chicago telephone directory, I came upon a
full-page advertisement of a firm of undertakers, or "morticians," as
they are now more elegantly styled in America. The type was large and
bold; my eye was fatally caught. I interrupted my search to read, in
twenty lines of lyrical prose, an appreciation of the incomparable
Service which Kalbsfleisch and Company were rendering to Society. Their
shop, I learned, was a mortuary chapel in the Gothic style; their
caskets (the grosser English would call them coffins) were elegant,
silk-lined and cheap; their motor-hearses were funereally sumptuous;
their manners towards the bereaved were grave, yet cheering, yet
purposefully uplifting; and they were fortunate in being able to "lay
the Loved Ones to rest in --- graveyard, the Cemetery Unusual." Service
was their motto and always would be. Service whole-hearted and
unflagging. And to prove that they meant it, personally and
individually, they had reproduced two photographs, one of Mr.
Kalbsfleisch, the Governing Director of the Firm, and the other of
charming Mrs. Kalbsfleisch, Licensed Embalmer.

I remained for some time in meditative contemplation of Mrs.
Kalbsfleisch's smile; I re-read more than once her husband's poetical
and uplifting prose. The page on which I now gazed was something more, I
reflected, than a mere page of advertising in a telephone book. It was a
page out of contemporary American history. Something is happening on the
Western shore of the Atlantic, something that has already made America
unlike any other country in the world, something that threatens to
separate it still further from the older civilisations, unless (which
God forbid) the older civilisations should themselves fall victims to
the same distorting process. To any one who reads and inwardly digests
Mr. Kalbsfleisch's advertisement in the Chicago telephone book, the
nature of this strange historical process becomes clear. The page is a
symptom and a revealing symbol.

The thing which is happening in America is a revaluation of values, a
radical alteration (for the worse) of established standards. Mr.
Kalbsfleisch shows us how far the process has already gone. How much
farther it may go we cannot guess, nor to what consummation it will
lead, nor whether there may be reactions and counter-processes.

There are two ways in which the existing standards of value may be
altered. In the first case, the very existence of values may be denied.
In the second, values are admitted, but the mode in which they are
assigned is changed: things which in the past had been regarded as
possessing great value are disparaged or, more often, things which were
previously considered of small value come to be regarded as precious.

In Europe such attempts as have been made to alter the existing standard
of values have generally taken the form of denials of the existence of
values. Our belief that things possess value is due to an immediate
sense or intuition; we feel, and feeling we know, that things have
value. If men have doubted the real existence of values, that is because
they have not trusted their own immediate and intuitive conviction. They
have required an intellectual, a logical and "scientific" proof of their
existence. Now such a proof is not easily found at the best of times.
But when you start your argumentation from the premises laid down by
scientific materialism, it simply cannot be discovered. Indeed, any
argument starting from these premises must infallibly end in a denial of
the real existence of values. Fortunately human beings are capable of
enormous inconsistencies, and the eighteenthand nineteenth-century men
of science, whose conception of the universe was such that values could
not be regarded by them as possessing any sort of real existence, were
in practice the most ardent upholders of the established standards of
values.

Still the materialist conception of the universe could not fail to exert
an influence. The generation of Arnold and of Tennyson sat uncomfortably
on the horns of what seemed an unescapable dilemma. Either the
materialist hypothesis was true; in which case there was no such thing
as value. Or else it was false; in which case values really existed, but
science could not. But science manifestly *did* exist. The electric
telegraph and the steam engine were there to prove it. The fact that you
could go into any post office and communicate almost instantaneously
with the antipodes was felt to be a confirmation of the materialistic
hypothesis then current among men of science. It worked, therefore it
was true, and therefore our intimate sense of the existence of values
was a mere illusion. Tennyson and Arnold did not want it to be an
illusion; they were distressed, they were inwardly divided. Their
intellects denied what their feelings asserted; and the Truth (or rather
what was at that time apparently the Truth) was at war with their hopes,
their intuitive convictions, their desires. The European intellectuals
of a later generation accepted the conclusions logically derivable from
the scientific-materialist hypothesis and resigned themselves --- almost
with glee --- to living in a devaluated world. Some of them are still with
us, and the theories which they propounded, as corollaries to the main
value-denying theory from which they started, are still influential.
Claiming to speak as the apostles of scientific truth, they stripped art
of its significance, they reinterpreted human life in terms, not of its
highest, spiritual aspects, but of its lowest. (I am using the terms
"highest" and "lowest," which they, of course, would repudiate as
nonsensical.) A less sophisticated generation had regarded the Sistine
frescoes as being somehow superior to a prettily patterned rug,
*Macbeth* as more important than *The Rape of the Lock*. Illusion!
According to the apostles of scientific truth, one was really just as
good as the other. Indeed, the *Rape* and the patterned rug were
actually superior to *Macbeth* and the Michelangelo frescoes, as being
more finished and perfect works of art: they aroused, it was explained,
intenser "aesthetic emotions." Art thus satisfactorily disposed of,
religion was next "explained in terms of sex. The moral conscience was
abolished (another illusion) and 'amuse yourself" proclaimed as the sole
categorical imperative. The theories of Freud were received in
intellectual circles with acclaim; to explain every higher activity of
the human mind in terms of incest and coprophily came to be regarded not
only as truly scientific, but also as somehow virile and courageous.
Freudism became the *realpolitik* of psychology and philosophy. Those
who denied values felt themselves to be rather heroic; instinctively
they were appealing to the standards which they were trying,
intellectually, to destroy.

Meanwhile the men of science are finding that the crude materialism of
their predecessors is a hypothesis that will not work. Our apostles of
scientific truth find themselves the apostles of what will soon be
universally regarded as a fallacy.

But the influence of these *ci-devant* "scientific" deniers of value has
not been wide. In most human beings the intuitive sense of values is too
strong to be seriously affected by intellectual arguments, however
specious. They are revolted by the denial of values; they insist on
interpreting the world in terms of high and low. Unfortunately, however,
they are apt to make mistakes and to call things by the wrong names,
labelling "high" what should rightly be low, and "low" what ought to be
high. This falsification of the standard of values is a product, in our
modern world, of democracy, and has gone farthest in America. It is much
more dangerous than the mere denial of values, because it is much more
popular. To most men and women the denial of values is horrible; but the
falsification of them so as to square with democratic prejudices is
pleasant and flattering. Let us examine Mr. Kalbsfleisch's advertisement
and try to discover the direction in which standards have been perverted
and the methods of falsification employed.

The democratic hypothesis in its extreme and most popular form is that
all men are equal and that I am just as good as you are. It is so
manifestly untrue that a most elaborate system of humbug has had to be
invented in order to render it credible to any normally sane human
being. Nowhere has this system of humbug been brought to such perfection
as in America. Take the case of Mr. Kalbsfleisch. He is an undertaker.
The trade he practises has never enjoyed great esteem; for, although it
is a necessary trade, it cannot be said to call for high intellectual or
moral qualities in its practitioners. Mr. Kalbsfleisch and his fellows
have realised and resented this failure on the part of humanity to
esteem them. Being good democrats, they want to insist on their equality
with the admittedly best people. They begin by altering the name of
their trade. The word "undertaker" has base associations. They therefore
coin a new locution and style themselves "morticians." "Mortician" is a
word that rhymes with such highly reputable words as physician,
mathematician, academician, politician --- not to mention Titian. What's
in a name? Much. From having been undertakers and mere tradesmen, the
morticians have become artists and members of an almost learned
profession.

Having emended their name, the morticians proceed to exalt and magnify
their calling. They do this in a very simple, but eminently effective
way: by insisting on the Service which they render to Humanity.

The notion of Service is fundamental to Christianity. Jesus and his
greatest followers have proclaimed the spiritual importance of Service
and have exhorted all men and women to be the servants of their fellows.
The morticians, and with them all the Business Men of America, are as
whole-heartedly enthusiastic about Service as was ever St. Francis or
his divine Master. But the activities which they designate by the word
"Service" happen to be slightly different from those which the Founder
of Christianity called by the same name. For Jesus and St. Francis,
Service connoted self-sacrifice, abnegation, humility. For the
morticians and other American Business Men, Service means something
else; it means doing profitable business efficiently and with just
sufficient honesty to keep out of jail. American Business Men talk like
St. Francis; but their activities are indistinguishable from those of
the money-changers and the sellers of doves whom Jesus expelled from the
Temple with a whip of small cords.

The money-changers and the bird-hawkers protested, no doubt, that they
were serving humanity as well as, and even better than, their aggressor.
"What we do," they must have argued, "is useful and necessary; society
finds us indispensable." It is on the same ground --- that they perform
necessary jobs well --- that American Business Men claim to be doing
Service, and Service of the highest value. They overlook the significant
historical fact that all the valuable things in life, all the things
that make for civilisation and progress, are precisely the unnecessary
ones. All scientific research, all art, all religion are (by comparison
with making coffins or breakfast foods) unnecessary. But if we had stuck
to the merely necessary, we should still be apes. According to any
proper standard of values, the unnecessary things and the unnecessary
people who are concerned with them are much more important than the
necessary ones. By exalting the merely necessary to an equality with the
unnecessary, the American Business Man has falsified the standard of
values. The service rendered by a mortician or a realtor has come to be
regarded as the equivalent of the service rendered by an artist of a man
of science. Babbitt can now honestly believe that he and his kind are
doing as much for humanity as the Pasteurs and the Isaac Newtons.
Kalbsfleisch among his silk-lined caskets knows himself to be as good as
Beethoven. Successful stockbrokers, certain that Business is Religion,
can come home after a day of speculation on the Exchange, feeling as
virtuously happy as Buddha must have felt when he had renounced the
world and received his great illumination.

In every part of the world and at all times the vast majority of human
beings has consisted of Babbitts and peasants. They are indispensable;
the necessary work must be done. But never, except at the present time,
and nowhere but in America, have the necessary millions believed
themselves the equals of the unnecessary few. In Europe the ancient
standards still persist, the ghost at least of the old hierarchy
survives. The rich parvenu may despise the man of science for his
poverty; but he still feels humble before his knowledge, his superior
intelligence and his disinterestedness. That technique of humbug, by the
employment of which successful stockbroking may be made to seem as
valuable and noble an occupation as scientific research or artistic
creation, has not yet been perfected in Europe, it has hardly been
invented. True, there are many people who would like to see the
technique introduced, ready-made and perfected, from across the
Atlantic. I trust, and I am even moderately confident, that they will be
forever disappointed.

Meanwhile, on the Western side of the Atlantic the progressive
falsification of values steadily continues. So far, what has happened is
this: preciousness has been attributed to things and people previously
regarded as possessing small value. But in certain parts of the Union
the innumerable necessary men are preparing to move a step farther. Not
content with attributing the highest possible value to themselves, they
are denying it to the unnecessary few; the majority has sovereign
rights. What was previously held to be high is now being disparaged. The
mental and moral qualities, the occupations and diversions of the
greatest number are regarded as the best, the sole permissible; the
qualities and occupations of the few are condemned. Stupidity,
suggestibility and business are held up as supremely precious.
Intelligence, independence and disinterested activity --- once
admired --- are in process of becoming evil things which ought to be
destroyed. In Tennessee and other remote provinces the crusade against
them has already begun. It remains to be seen whether this further
perversion of values will affect the rest of the continent.
:::


\clearpage
