\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## NEW YORK {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
Now that liberty is out of date, equality an exploded notion and
fraternity a proven impossibility, republics should change their
mottoes. Intelligence, Sterility, Insolvency: that would do for
contemporary France. But not for America. The American slogan would have
to be something quite different. The national motto should fit the
national facts. What I should write under America's flapping eagle would
be: Vitality, Prosperity, Modernity.

Let us begin with the last, modernity. Modernity in this context may be
defined as the freedom (at any rate in the sphere of practical, material
life) from customary bonds and ancient prejudices, from traditional and
vested interest; the freedom, in a word, from history. Change is
accepted in America as the first and fundamental fact --- and accepted,
not as other peoples have accepted it, as an evil to be combated by the
organisation of a stable society, by the making of things too strong and
solid for time to be able quickly to devour, but as a good, as the
foundation and key of practical life. Most things in this modern land
are provisional, made to last only till something better, or at any rate
something newer, shall appear to take their place. All through the
country the houses have an air of impermanence; the landscape, wherever
the hand of man has touched it, looks sketchy and unfinished. The
factories are perpetually renewing themselves; half their profits are
earmarked for the expenses of this chronic rejuvenation. Forty-year old
locomotives, having the strange and almost fabulous aspect of Tertiary
monsters, still rumble over European rails. A respectable American
railway company would think itself disgraced by the possession of an
engine that was more than ten years of age. Nor would the engines
survive much longer; things, here, are built to be scrapped as soon as
they have outworn their first youth. Change is made much of, it is
rejoiced in. That is modernity.

And then there is prosperity. America is a half-populated country
teeming with natural wealth. Business methods are unhampered, except
perhaps in the East, by the old traditions belonging to a vanished form
of society. The traditions of an age of feudalism, of agriculture and of
craftsmanship have done much to cramp the efficient and rational
development of industrialism in Europe. The greater part of America
started with a clean slate. In California there is one motor car to
every three inhabitants. Considering the Californian circumstances, it
is not to be wondered at.

American vitality is a function, mathematically speaking, of the
prosperity and the modernity. An insufficiently nourished human being
requires a great deal of rest. Reduced to an Indian diet, Americans
would be a good deal less interested than they actually are in business
efficiency, uplift and the Charleston. They would spend most of their
spare time in doze, or in the doze's first cousin: meditation. But they
have enough to eat --- a great deal more than enough, in fact. They can
afford to hustle; indeed they must hustle or else die of plethora. Men
and women who wash down beefsteaks with glasses of rich creamy milk need
to do something pretty strenuous in order to keep alive at all.

The psychological effects of prosperity are hardly less striking than
the physical. In less fortunate countries the precariousness of
existence keeps large classes of the population in a state of chronic
fear. Unemployment is a haunting apprehension, both to manual workers
and to those who wear black coats. So little is needed in Europe to
precipitate the man of the middle class into the abysses of lower
classdom; the bottomless pit of poverty, into which so many of the
manual workers have already fallen, gapes before his feet. Fear haunts
and for ever darkly impends. Fear is the enemy of life; it inhibits
every function of the mind and body. That is why, in the less fortunate
parts of Europe, vitality is so low.

In America this fear hardly exists; there is no reason why any one
should fail to earn good wages. Nor is the fall from the status of the
clerk to that, shall we say, of the factory hand discreditable, as it
would be in the older countries, where the prejudice against manual
labour as something fundamentally degrading and unrespectable still
lingers. The middle classes are therefore largely relieved of their
terror of losing caste. Liberated from fear, the Americans live with
confidence, and therefore with enhanced vitality. A generous
extravagance, undreamed of in other parts of the world, is the American
rule. Men and women earn largely and spend what they have on the
national pleasures, which are all social and stimulative of vitality.

Modernity also tends to heighten vitality --- or to be more exact, it
affects the expression of vitality, externalising it in the form of
vehement action. The joyful acceptance of change, which so profoundly
influences American industry, business methods and domestic
architecture, reacts on the affairs of daily, personal life. Pleasure is
associated with a change of place and environment, finally with mere
movement for its own sake. People leave their homes if they want
entertainment. They externalise their vitality in visiting places of
public amusement, in dancing and motoring --- in doing anything that is
not quietly sitting by their own fireside (or rather by their own
radiator). What is known as "night life" flourishes in America as
nowhere else in the world. And nowhere, perhaps, is there so little
conversation. In America vitality is given its most obviously vital
expression. Hence there appears to be even more vitality in the
Americans than perhaps there really is. A man may have plenty of
vitality and yet keep still; his motionless calm may be mistaken for
listlessness. There can be no mistake about people who dance and rush
about. American vitality is always obviously manifested. It expresses
itself vigorously to the music of the drum and saxophone, to the ringing
of telephone bells and the roar of street cars. It expresses itself in
terms of hastening automobiles, of huge and yelling crowds, of speeches,
banquets, "drives," slogans, sky signs. It is all movement and noise,
like the water gurgling out of a bath --- down the waste. Yes, down the
waste.

America is popularly supposed to be a country of puritanism. And so it
is, as any one who travels across it can discover. But what the
traveller also discovers --- to his vast surprise, if he happens to have
arrived with conventional opinions about the country --- is that a
Rabelaisian looseness is just as characteristic of contemporary America
as puritanical strictness. In Philadelphia the respectable booksellers
do not stock Mr. Cabell's *Jurgen*. In Boston the Watch and Ward Society
suppresses the *American Mercury*, and in the same city one at least of
my own novels has to be sold under the counter as though it were whisky.
I have been in Middle Western hotels where it was considered indecent
for my wife to smoke a cigarette in the public rooms. And though I have
not visited the Southern States, I have read in the newspapers the most
extraordinary accounts of the persecutions to which unfaithful wives and
errant husbands are liable there. It would be possible to quote many
other examples of American puritanism. The list would be long and
curious. These few specimens, however, are sufficient to prove the old
contention that America is a puritanical country.

But it is also and simultaneously one of the least puritanical countries
I have ever visited. In the theatres of New York it is possible to see
plays of a character which can hardly be paralleled in any other city of
the world. I do not speak of the displays of naked women; these have now
become too commonplace to be remarked on --- except, perhaps, in a country
colonised by the Pilgrim Fathers. And in any case, Puritans tolerate
spectacles and actions much more willingly than they tolerate words. It
is only during the last few months that the Lord Chamberlain of England
has finally brought himself to license the public performance of Bernard
Shaw's play, *Mrs. Warren's Profession*. Countless performances, whose
appeal was frankly pornographic, have been licensed during the
quarter-century of Mrs. Warren's exile from the stage. Shaw's crime was
to have discussed frankly and seriously the subject of prostitution. He
broached certain ideas, used certain words. Puritans like to wear the
fig leaf over the mouth. This puritanical idiosyncrasy renders all the
more remarkable the verbal frankness of many of the plays current in New
York during the past months --- plays in which there was no exposure of
skin, but where spades were openly called spades, and often worse, more
intimate names. I remember, for example, a play called *Cradle
Snatchers*. It was a Restoration comedy brought up to date --- Wycherley
without the wit. Indeed, it was a little more than Restoration. Its
theme, which concerns three middle-aged ladies, who hire three young men
as lovers, is very close to that of a comedy of Fletcher's, *The Custom
of the Country*, which Dryden, when defending the Restoration Theatre
against the attacks of Jeremy Collier, pronounced to be far more
indecent than any play written in his own day.

Nor was this play an isolated phenomenon. *Sex* lived up to its simple
name. *Lulu Belle* and *The Shanghai Gesture* were no less remarkable.
The fruitiest passage in *Gentlemen Prefer Blondes*, which was playing
when I passed through Chicago, had a robustly Rabelaisian humour, which
I for one enormously enjoyed. But what did Mr. Sumner of the New York
Vice Society think of those Gargantuan jokes? What about chaste Mr.
Chase from Boston? And what would have been the reaction of those two
lineal descendants of the Pilgrim Fathers to the casual, light-hearted
references to homosexuality which I heard at more than one burlesque
show and cabaret? I wonder.

It is not alone in the theatre that this spirit of anti-puritanism
exhibits itself; it is also in American life. In one part of the country
cigarette smoking will be forbidden, and the self-appointed censors of
public morality will hold up passing automobiles and demand to see the
marriage certificates of their occupants. In another the relations of
the sexes will be easy, intimate and (how shall I phrase it?)
chronically amorous. Fresh from the conventionalities and decorum of
Paris and London, the stranger coming to the West Coast will be
astonished by the amount of casual embracement, squeezing and public
kissing which he sees going on, among the most respectable members of
society, in restaurants and dancing-places. He will be astonished by the
frankness with which people discuss their intimate affairs --- in voices,
moreover, so loud that the most private details are reverberatingly
audible for yards around. He will be impressed by the almost Congolese
style of dancing, while that general atmosphere of hilarious inebriation
which pervades the night life of all American cities will make him
wonder whether a little less Prohibition --- which means a little less
whisky --- might not perhaps be a good thing. In modern America the Rome
of Cato and the Rome of Heliogabalus co-exist and flourish with an
unprecedented vitality.
:::



\clearpage
