\clearpage
::: chapter-heading
## LONDON {.chapter-title}
:::

::: chapter-content
So the journey is over and I am back again where I started, richer by
much experience and poorer by many exploded convictions, many perished
certainties. For convictions and certainties are too often the
concomitants of ignorance. Of knowledge and experience the fruit is
generally doubt. It is a doubt that grows profounder as knowledge more
deeply burrows into the underlying mystery, that spreads in exact
proportion as experience is widened and the perceptions of the
experiencing individual are refined. A fish's convictions, we may be
sure, are unshakeable. A dog is as full of certainty as the Veteran
Liberal who has held the same opinions for forty years. You might
implore a cat, as Cromwell by the bowels of Christ once implored a
parliament, to bethink it that it might be mistaken; the beast would
never doubt but that it was right.

I set out on my travels knowing, or thinking that I knew, how men should
live, how be governed, how educated, what they should believe. I knew
which was the best form of social organisation and to what end societies
had been created. I had my views on every activity of human life. Now,
on my return, I find myself without any of these pleasing certainties.
Before I started, you could have asked me almost any question about the
human species and I should glibly have returned an answer. Ask a
profoundly ignorant man how the electric light works; he finds the
question absurdly simple. "You just press the button," he explains. The
working electrician would give you a rather more technical account of
the matter in terms of currents, resistances, conductivity. But the
philosophical physicist would modestly confess his ignorance. Electrical
phenomena, he would say, can be described and classified. But as for
saying what electricity may be ... And he would throw up his hands. The
better you understand the significance of any question, the more
difficult it becomes to answer it. Those who like to feel that they are
always right and who attach a high importance to their own opinions
should stay at home. When one is travelling, convictions are mislaid as
easily as spectacles; but unlike spectacles, they are not easily
replaced.

My own losses, as I have said, were numerous. But in compensation for
what I lost, I acquired two important new convictions: that it takes all
sorts to make a world and that the established spiritual values are
fundamentally correct and should be maintained. I call these opinions
"new," though both are at least as old as civilisation and though I was
fully convinced of their truth before I started. But truths the most
ancient, the most habitually believed, may be endowed for us as the
result of new experience with an appearance of apocalyptic novelty.
There is all the difference in the world between believing academically,
with the intellect, and believing personally, intimately, with the whole
living self. A deaf man who had read a book about music might be
convinced, theoretically, that Mozart was a good composer. But cure his
deafness, take him to listen to the G minor Symphony; his conviction of
Mozart's greatness would become something altogether new.

Of the fact that it takes all sorts to make a world I have been aware
ever since I could read. But proverbs are always platitudes until you
have personally experienced the truth of them. The newly arrested thief
knows that honesty is the best policy with an intensity of conviction
which the rest of us can never experience. And to realise that it takes
all sorts to make a world one must have seen a certain number of the
sorts with one's own eyes. Having seen them and having in this way
acquired an intimate realisation of the truth of the proverb, one finds
it hard to go on complacently believing that one's own opinions, one's
own way of life are alone rational and right. This conviction of man's
diversity must find its moral expression in the practice of the
completest possible tolerance.

But if travel brings a conviction of human diversity, it brings an
equally strong conviction of human unity. It inculcates tolerance, but
it also shows what are the limits of possible toleration. Religions and
moral codes, forms of government and of society are almost endlessly
varied, and each has a right to its separate existence. But a oneness
underlies this diversity. All men, whatever their beliefs, their habits,
their way of life, have a sense of values. And the values are everywhere
and in all kinds of society broadly the same. Goodness, beauty, wisdom
and knowledge, with the human possessors of these qualities, the human
creators of things and thoughts endowed with them, have always and
everywhere been honoured.

Our sense of values is intuitive. There is no proving the real existence
of values in any way that will satisfy the logical intellect. Our
standards can be demolished by argumentation; but we are none the less
right to cling to them. Not blindly, of course, not uncritically.
Convinced by practical experience of man's diversity, the traveller will
not be tempted to cling to his own inherited national standard, as
though it were necessarily the only true and unperverted one. He will
compare standards; he will search for what is common to all; he will
observe the ways in which each standard is perverted, he will try to
create a standard of his own that shall be as far as possible free from
distortion. In one country, he will perceive, the true, fundamental
standard is distorted by an excessive emphasising of hierarchic and
aristocratic principles; in another by an excess of democracy. Here, too
much is made of work and energy for their own sakes; there, too much of
mere being. In certain parts of the world he will find spirituality run
wild; in others a stupid materialism that would deny the very existence
of values. The traveller will observe these various distortions and will
create for himself a standard that shall be, as far as possible, free
from them --- a standard of values that shall be as timeless, as
uncontingent on circumstances, as nearly absolute as he can make them.
Understanding diversity and allowing for it, he will tolerate, but not
without limit. He will distinguish between harmless perversions and
those which tend actually to deny or stultify the fundamental values.
Towards the first he will be tolerant. There can be no compromise with
the second.
:::
\clearpage
