# SUMMARY

The problem of the origin of the English customs-
revenue is one of more than antiquarian interest. The
subject forms an indispensable chapter in the history
of taxation; it has a bearing on constitutional history;
and it is of especial importance in a study of the de-
velopment from the local to the national economy of
England.

The student of the early history of the customs is
beset by difficulties at every hand. There are com-
paratively few documents giving specific information
for the period before 1275. After that year the de-
tailed customs accounts, many of which still remain,
were returned to the Exchequer. Undated or incor-
rectly dated documents add to the confusion. The
lack of a discriminating nomenclature at the form-
ative period, which is of course to be expected, is a
great drawback since it forces the investigator to
exclude scores of documents too vague to be of
service.

# REVIEW OF CUSTOMS THEORIES

Difficult and obscure as is the problem of customs
origins, there is no lack of explanatory theories. The
first group of explanations may be designated a priori:
the need that traders felt for protection, giving the
crown an opportunity to offer its aid and to collect
a toll therefor;3/1 the necessity of a royal licence to
trade, particularly to import;3/2 and finally, the asser-
tion that the export tax was but a part of the general
system of taxing personal property.3/3 It is small
wonder that a critical scholar has scoffed at such
theorizing.3/4

/1 Dowell, for instance, dates the Statutum de Scaccario at 1266 (i, p. 77),
following the statutes at large, when it should be put in the early part of the
14th century. Likewise the documents printed in Liber Albus are not carefully dated.
To Professor Liebermann (Zeitschr der Savigny-Stiftung, V, 1885, Leges Anglorum,
1894) and to Miss Bateson (English Hist. Rev., XVII, pp. 480-511, 707-730) not a little
    is due for text crticism and text editing.

However well such views may fit in with the results
of comparative studies of primitive conditions, they
are obviously not so worthy of consideration as con-
clusions which are based upon direct historical evidence.
From his study of the documentary sources, partic-
ularly constitutional, Stubbs was well aware that
there was something like customs duties before 1275,
tho he seems to have regarded the grant of that year
as the legal foundation of the English customs,3/5 limit-
ing elsewhere, nevertheless, the application of the
grant.3/6 The counterpart of this theory of political
origin by parliamentary sanction is that which empha-
sises the rôle played by the royal prerogative, especially
the prerogative prise.3/7 This is the chief contribution
of Mr. Hubert Hall, who apparently followed up and
elaborated a general statement made by Dowell.3/8
This view has gained most general acceptance,3/9 since
it is the only one resting upon an apparently adequate
examination of the sources, and sufficiently elaborate
to seem to take into account all of the facts.4/1 Sir
James Ramsay, however, has expressed a dissatis-
faction with our present knowledge of early customs
history4/2 which must, indeed, have been felt by others.
My own researches into the records, both those long
open to the public, and those newly accessible,4/3 have
made it clear that the evidence needs to be re-examined
and supplemented.

3/1 Dowell, vol. 1, p. 75.

3/2 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol ii, pp 76, 91-92 Bodin (Sıx Livres de la République,
p. 875) combined these two elements of permission and protection.

3/3 Green, History of the English People, vol. 1, p. 323, Stubbs, The Early Plan-
tageneta, p. 230.

3/4 McKechne, Magna Carta, P 465 a.

3/5 The Early Plantagenets, p. 231.

3/6 Constitutional History of England (ed. 1875), vol. ii, p. 523.

3/7 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. ii, chaps. iii--v.

3/8 Sketch of the History of Taxes in England (1876), vol. i, p. 152. "Toll ...
appears to have originated in arbitrary exactions from the merchants."

3/9 Tout, Edward I, p. 141; Gardiner, Students' History of England, vol. I,
p. 211, Stubbs, Const. History of England (4th ed }, vol. 11, pp. 549-550 n.; Medley,
Const. History of England, p. 470; Alton and Holland, The King's Custom, p. 4.

Two modern writers content themselves with
describing the early history of the customs as "intri-
cate, "obscure,"4/4 and "complicated,"4/5 and an
earlier author goes so far as to declare that it is fruitless
to try to discover the origin of the customs./6 But it
is clearly recognized that there were at the time of the
Magna Carta "ancient and right customs which are
referred to as well-known things."'7 It will be the
task of this paper, therefore, to consider the nature of
the ancient and due customs of the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, customs not only " well-known," but,
when the crown was attempting new levies, very much
cherished. Before any attempt is made, however,
to offer a new explanation, it will be necessary to
examine Mr. Hall's accepted prise theory.

By the year 1347, there existed for the first time
all those dues afterwards forming integral parts of
the " customs and subsidies,"5/1 but for the beginning
of the customs system, with which we are specially
concerned, it is essential to go back of this well-known
set of customs. This may be conveniently done by a
consideration of four main topics: (a) the prise itself,
(b) the prise commutations, (c) the customs of 1275,
and (d) the later history of the prise.

/1 Mr. Hubert Hall, the chief advocate of the prise theory, has given me valuable
assistance during the period of my researches in the British Record Office, and altho
I cannot accept the views expressed in his Custom-Revenue, I wish to acknowledge
the great debt I owe him.

/2 Dawn of the Constitution, p 314,

/3 See above, p. 107, n. 1.

/4 Medley, Const. History of England, p 470

/5 Maitland, Const History of England, p. 180.

/6 Gilbert, The Court of Exchequer (1738). pp. 214-215.

/7 Maitland, Const. History of England, p. 180.

(a) The prise. The evidence brought forward by
the chief exponent of the prise theory is very scanty,
For the Anglo-Saxon period there is confessedly "no
evidence," " But there is a strong presumption from
the analogy of later Customs." 2 The examples for the
later period cover the reigns from Henry II to Edward II
and are either orders to provide various goods without
further specification, or where information is definite,
“ examples of purveyance pure and simple.” 3 In
the chapter following that containing the above refer-
ences is a Chamberlain's account of 10 Richard I,
in which are cited " prises proper, or goods purveyed
and resold at a profit.” 4. These are three in number:
wine, wool, and corn prises. The wine prise is dealt
with below. The other two examples are important
here. In the original document nothing is said about
the wool in question being prise-wool. In case of the
prise-corn, the word " captus " is used, which clearly
indicates a seizure of the goods themselves,/1 but else-
where in the same document, capture is made
from the King's enemies” or because of contraven-
tion of the king's orders against exportation to Flanders.
It is probable that the men of Rye who had their corn
seized by the king were guilty of this offence, in com-
mon with the other men of the Cinque Ports.6/2

/1 Under one or the other of the following categories every article exported or im-
ported by alien or denizen was included and taxed

TODO:

Aliens;Denizens
Customs of 1275.;Customs of 1275.
New customs of 1302-03;Cloth customs.
Subsidy on wool.;Subaidy on wool
Tonnage and poundage.;Tonnage and poundage

In addition to these waa priaage, due on aliena' wines imported till 1302-03, and on
denizena' wines imported til the 18th century.

/2 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol 11, p 61.

/3 Ibid., vol 11, pp 64–69. In 1174-75 account was made "de Prisis et redemptione
priaonum et alus perquisitionibus tempore werre." Pipe Roll, 21 H II, p. 5.

/4 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. ii, p 83.

/5 See p. 136.

/6 "Et de xxh de lana Willelmi de Bolonia vendita per visum Stephanı Crassi et
Yvenia Clerici constabulari et Petrı Bat." MS. Pipe Roll, No. 44, memb. 12 b.

Up to the time of Richard I, then, not a single clear
example of the general prise has been brought forward.
None the less it behooves us to inquire if there can be
found any further valid evidence for regarding the
prise as a precursor of the customs. Is it true that
the king sought so rough and ready a way of providing
for his needs, which he later changed into a great
financial system ?

In the interpretation of the documents bearing upon
the subject, one must clearly distinguish between two
well-marked meanings of the word "prise." Failure
to do so has marred much that has been written on the
subject. The two meanings are, on the one hand,
purveyance and, on the other, seizure of merchants'
goods. Under these two heads, I list the chief prises.
found in the thirteenth century or earlier. The
following scheme indicates the distinction which
should be borne in mind :---

A. Purveyance from producers:/3
  I. Irregular: --
    (a) Use, provisions for king's household.
    (b) Abuse, (1) by king's servants, resale for profit. (2) by king's order, wool, etc., for resale.
 II. Regular: locally for provisioning castles.
B. Prise of merchants' goods:---
  I. Irregular: local and foreign trade not differentiated.
    (a) Use, (1) for wardrobe, wax, cloth, etc. (2) for butlery, wine.
    (b) Abuse, (1) excessive amounts, non-payment, delay of payment, undervaluation, etc. (2) drawing the prise into a custom:---
      (a') for resale,
      (b') for money fine.
  II. Regular: the ancient prises due and accustomed.
    (a) Foreign trade, for butlery, prisa vinorum 4/1:--- (1) Pre-recta, (2) Recta.
    (b) Local trade.

/1 Et de XIIII et XIIII et XIde Blado capto ab hominibus de Ria.

/2 Madox, vol. 1, p. 565 n. (1 John).

/3 The antithesis of producers and merchants is obviously more convenient than
 logical

_Purveyance_. --- This was the ancient provision made
by the king (or a lord) for supplying himself and follow-
ing with food and other necessaries, by a seizure of
the goods desired. The history of this institution
from the twelfth to the seventeenth century is well
known and needs no further comment here, except
that it was irregular/2 and sporadic, and was based
upon the household and military needs of the king.
Whether the goods seized were paid for depended
much upon circumstances, tho legislation sought to
safeguard the subject in this respect.

_Prise of merchants' goods_. --- Whilst general pur-
veyance affected producers, the prise of merchandise
touched chiefly middlemen; whilst the first was chiefly
for houshold use, such as corn, beef, eggs, etc., the latter
was primarily for the Great Wardrobe, and included
such commodities as cloths and wax.

The earliest instance found of the prise of merchants'
goods comes from the middle of the twelfth century.
“Within the term of these three tides, the sheriff
and the king's chamberlain are to come to the ship

/1 Below, p. 136.

/2 One form of pride was regularly provided for, if not regularly levied. the prise
which the constable of a castle could take from the people of the town in which the castle
was situated, Ed. I, chap. 7.

and, if there is a vessel of gold or silver of Solomon
work, or precious stones, or cloth of Constantinople
or of Regensburg, or fine linen, or coats of mail from
Mainz, they shall take them for the king's use, by
the view and appraisal of the loyal merchants of London
and within a fortnight pay the money.”/1 This docu-
ment shows clearly a normal case of prise, not a capture
but an appraisement, not a mere seizure but an official
purchase. All the articles were for the king's use.

My table of analysis of the prise has obviated
discussion on many points of detail, but it is of the
greatest importance to mark that local trade was not
differentiated from foreign trade. The irregular prise
was taken at fairs,/2 good towns, and sea-ports./3 In
spite of what has been said to the contrary, that from
general purveyance the prise was extended to the
case of commodities either exported from or imported
into this country,”/4 it is clear that the prise on
merchants' goods partook more of the nature of a
special tallage of merchants, comparable with that
of Jews, than of the nature of custom duties. It
resembled a tax on the moveables of one class of the
community rather than a tax on articles of trade, and
certainly articles of foreign trade as such were not
considered at all.

/1 A London Municipal Collection of the Reign of John, Bateson, E H. R., vol. xvii,
pp 496, 499. (Cf Hohlbaum, Hans Urkundenbuch, vol 111, 602 )

    “Dedenz le terme de ces tres itides det le veskunte e le chamberleng le rei venir
    a la nef e se il iad veissele dor u dargent del oure salemun v piere preciuse v pailles de
    Costentinoble y de Renesburgh v cheingil v walebrun de Maence, ail prendrunt al oes
    le rei, par leagart e par le pris des leala marchantz de Lundres, e a quinzeine rendre lur
    deniers."

/2 Infeng 1s explained as Quite de prises en festes." Expositiones vocabulorum,
Red Book of the Exchequer, vol ni, p. 1035

    King Henry III, in the 30th year of his reign reserved for himself, when granting
    the tolls of the fair of St. Ives, the prise there. " Salvis nobis et heredibus nostris
    prisis in eisdem " [nundinis Sancti Yvons). Ms. Cart Harl, 58, 1, (10).
    
    The king also granted in the same year to a merchant of Douay: "quod negotiari
    possit per totum Regnum Anglie faciendo rectas et debitas conguetudines. Ita quod
    nulla prise fiat ad opus Regis de pannis suis ab instantibus nundinis Sancti Botulli
    anno etc. xxx usque in ni annos sequentes Pat. R, 30 H. III, m 4 Cf, Hall,
    Custom-Revenue, vol. 11, p 86.

    "De prisis domini regis nundinis et mercatis et civitatibus" Petition of the
    Barons, 1258 (Stubba, Select Chartera, p. 376).

/3 "And concerning Prises made in Faira, and good Towns, and in Ports for the
King's great Wardrobe, the Takers shall have their common Warrant under the Great
Seal." 28 Ed. I, chap 2.

/4 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. I, p. 61. Cf. Cunningham, English Industry and
Commerce (4th ed.), vol. 1, p. 276.

Frequent reference was made in the thirteenth
century to prises over and above those that were
“ancient due and accustomed."/1 This applied to
wines as well as to other commodities. But there is
no evidence to show whether this was the use or the
abuse of the prise. Freedom from either would have
been a privilege of value.

By far the greatest interest centers about the abuse
of the irregular or unsystematic prise, by which the
prise might have been “ drawn into a custom," that
is, the prise might conceivably have become systematic.

It is well known that Henry III was more or less
a wine-merchant, and that Edward I was on the high-
way to become a wool-monger. But the crown could
never get very far in dealings of this kind. Only
a few commodities lent themselves to such exploita-
tion, and the king of England never became a mer-
chant prince. It was in the levying of a money fine
for exemption of merchandise from all prise that the
irregular prise had some chance of becoming regular
or systematic; since a money fine lends itself to syste-
matic exaction and collection. But the only evidence
found of such a development is in section 23 of the
Petition of the Barons in 1258. From the preceding

/1 The merchants of Bordeaux in 1253-54 secured the exemption from all priseа over
and above the ancient prises of wines. Cal Pat R , H III, vol ill, p. 294 Likewise
the men of Bourg-on-the-Sea received freedom in 1254 for three years from the super-
prise on wines. Ibid , vol iv, p 381. In 1286, the men of Dieppe were freed from
prises, preste, and other exactions and demands, except the king's due and
Ancient prises"; and the merchants of Lubeck were given similar exemptions, except
when payment was immediately made to them. Cal Pat. R., H. III, 1258-66, p. 621;
Höhlbaum, Hans. Urkundenbuch, vol. i, § 635.

clause, however, it is evident that this had not gone
far, that is, had not really supplanted the prise of
goods itself.10/1

The regular prises on merchants' goods were the
often mentioned “due and accustomed prises” which,
like the irregular ones, concerned local as well as foreign
trade. The only article prised thus in foreign trade was
wine.

The regular prise in the local trade was either a tax
(" custuma ville”) on local trade paid in kind, with
which the crown was usually not directly concerned,
or a prise for the upkeep of a castle. Examples of the
former class are to be found in Sandwich,/2 Lynn,/3
Berwick,/4 and Chester,/5 and of the latter in Worcester,/6
and Bristol./7 The prise of the second class is further
clearly set out for Newcastle,/8 and indeed was regarded
as a perfectly general right in 1317,/9 and in the
reign of Henry VIII was still a regular practice in
London.11/1

/1 § 22
The king's takers of prises in fairs, markets, and towns are to be reasonable,
and take only for the king's uae. Complaint is made that they take two-and three-fold
more than needed, and that they take for their own use and for their friends, and even
sell a part
§ 23. "Item conqueruntur quod dominus rex de prisis nullam fere facit paca.
tionem, ita quod plures mercatores de regao Angliae ultra modum depauperentur, et
alu mercatores extranei ea occasione subtrahunt se de veniendo in terram istam cum
sus mercibus, unde terra magnam incurrit jacturam" Stubbs, Select Charters,
pp. 376-377.

/2 MS K. R. Customs, 157/12 (Ed. I). Port somewhat uncertain, but clearly on the
east coast near London.

/3 Gross, Gild Merchant, vol. 11, p. 157 (1335).

/4 K R. Customs, 193/2 (31 Ed. I).

/5 MS. Harl. 2125, fol 189 b (ca. 1560), a prise due "of ould tyme."

/6 Cal. Ch. R., H, III, vol. I, p. 23 (1227).

/7 Cal. CI. R., H. III, vol, i, p. 257 (1229).

/8 Altho in 1229 it was held that the local prise did not belong to the crown (Cal.
CI R, H. III, vol. 1, p. 152), in 1290 it was made clear that the king bad, besides thọ
recta prisa on wine, a prise on herringa and haddocks. Rot. P., vol. 1, p. 27 a.

/9 No purveyance is to be made unless payment is rendered, excepting the
ancient prises of the king in places where the king's castles are situate according to
Magna Carta and the other prises due to the king." Cal. CI. R , Ed. II, 1313-18,
p. 584.


From what has been said, it is evident that the
"ancient prises due and accustomed” either had no
reference to foreign trade, or were confined to one
article of foreign trade, wine, clearly an exception./2
The other prises were never systematized. Not only
has no evidence been adduced by the sponsors of the
prise theory, but I have found no additional support
in the accounts of the exchequer or wardrobe, either
particular or summary.

(b) _Prise commutations_. --- The second stage in the
prise theory is found in the period from Richard I
to Edward 1,3 when, it is alleged, the prise was com-
muted to a money payment. If the conclusions in
the preceding section be correct, there is obviously
no room for commutation. Nevertheless the evidence
for prise commutation deserves examination.
The one example given of a tenth levied on mer-
chants' goods belongs to 10 Richard 1.4 But this,
like an earlier case, is probably a tallage of a tenth.6
Certainly there is no evidence that it is a tax on trade
as distinct from a tax on personal property.
The fifteenth is considered at length below.? If
our evidence fails us not, it belongs to the reign of

/1 Petition of wine merchants, alien and denizen, against the practice of the officials
of the Tower of filling their great bottles of three pottles each with wine and lose from
spilling. Merchants were willing to commute to a money payment. MS. K, R.
Custome, 195/20.
9 Below, p. 140.
Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol 1, p. 66, vol. 11, p. 133.
# Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. 11, p. 83. "De decimis mercatorum de pluribus
mercatur18 quas recepit per dies in primo anno sicut dicit" MS. Pipe Roll, L.T.R.,
No. 44, m. 12 b.
6 Madox, vol. 1, p 775 (6-8 R. I). De Finibus et Decimis Mercatorum de Stagno
et aliis Mercaturis apud Londoniam"
& Cf. Madox, vol. 1, p 730 (8 R. I), also vol. 1, pp. 726–727.
7 See p. 143.
41

------
John, has nothing to do with prises, and was abolished
for good and all before the death of the king who
instituted it. Madox 1 seems to have been the first
to have coupled the tenth with the fifteenth, and most
subsequent writers have found virtue in the association.
Perhaps the original suggestion of the tenth and
fifteenth as a trade duty came from the tenth and
fifteenth on moveables, a wholly different tax.
=
(c) The customs of 1275. In disposing of the first
two points, we have virtually disposed of the others
also. Yet for the purpose of continuing our examina-
tion of the third step in the prise theory, the commuted
prise, the tenth and fifteenth, may be taken for granted;
that is, the first links in the chain are to be provisionally
accepted in order to test the third. The third link
is that the grant of 1275 was merely an official con-
firmation of old dues, --- dues now granted anew.?
This is based upon two suppositions; first, that the
customs of 1275 were called "ancient” at the time,
and second, that they were levied upon a wider range
of goods than specified in the grant.
The Carta Mercatoria of February 1, 1302–03, gives
some clue on the first point. The term ancient
customs occurs in three connections: first, with refer-
ence to the 2s. per tun duty on imported wine (later
called butlerage), “ beyond the ancient customs due
and accustomed to be paid to us and others in
money"; second, in connection with the increase
over the ancient customs of 1275 on wool, wool-fells,
and hides; and third, the increase of new customs
beyond the ancient customs formerly given to us
4
i Madox, vol. 1, pp. 771-775.
9 Cf. " Custuma vinorum ( ultra Antiquam Custumam unius denaru Regi vel alus
solvendam')." Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol 11, p. 109.

------
or to others." 1 Besides these the wine prise, hence-
forth commuted to butlerage, may also be included as
ancient customs.
Ancient customs at this time, then, were taken to
be (a) the customs of 1275, and (6) another set,
b
about which little is here made known except that they
included a money duty on wine, a wine prise, and other
dues payable to the crown and others, to which the
burgesses of England had no objection, and which
were therefore of definite meaning and well understood.2
In the Carta Mercatoria the customs of 1275 are
called "ancient." Dowell maintains that they were
so called for the first time in 1297, in the Confirmatio
Cartarum, and this view has been accepted by others.
But Mr. Hall uses the term Antiqua Custuma
7
4
10
1 If this phrase in the Carta Mercatoria referred solely to the poundage on aliens'
exports, then it would not be placed where it 18, but after * argenti," as in the cases
where it occurs elsewhere.
* Item, de quolibet sacco lange, quem dicti mercatores, aut alu nomine ipsorum
ement, et de regno nostro educent, aut emi et edduci facient, solvent quodraginta
denarios, de incremento, ultra custumam antiquam dimidiae marcae, quae prius
fuerat persoluta. . . . Cumque, de praefatis mercatoribus, nonnulli eorum alias
exerceant mercandısas, ut de averio ponderis, et de aliis rebus subtilibua, sicut de
pannis Tarsen', de serico, et alus rebus, et mercand1919 multimodis, quae ad
certam custumam facile poni non poterunt, idem mercatores concesserunt dare nobis,
et haeredibus nostris, de qualibet libra argenti aestimationis, tres denarios de
libra, in introitu rerum et mercandısarum ipsarum, in regnum et potestatem nostram
praedicta, et similiter tres denarios de qualibet libra argenti, in eductione
quarumcumque rerum et mercandısarum hujusmodi, emptarum in regno et potestate
nostra prædictis, ultra custumas antiquas, nobis, aut aliis, ante datas." Rymer,
Fædera, vol 11, pt ii, p. 748
2 Mr. Hall, however, in speaking of the customs about 1297 (-1303] refers to
an indefinite toll upon merchandise at the ports," and "a discretionary toll upon all
merchandise" Antiquary, vol. vi, p 63
It 19 probable that a customary percentage was charged on other merchandise
also." Meredith, Economic History of England, p. 72
Fleta (ed 1647, p 84) 18 similarly indefinite " Item quod principales collectores
custumarum, lanarum, coriorum, aliorum theoloniorum diotis terminis denarios
Regie receptos liberentur ad Scaccarium "
14
9)
64
14
3 Sketch of the History of Taxation, vol i, p. 157. This seems to have been an
attempt to harmonise Gilbert's assertion that he saw in the Tower a record of the
customs of 1275, called nova custuma * with the preconception that before 1302-03
they were called ancient."
4 Kunze, Hanseakten aus England, p. xxxvü; Meredith, Economic History of
England, p 173.
14

------
6
as if such a designation held good from the very first,
that is in 1275. The earliest occurence of the phrase
anywhere found is in a printed document of the
year 1297. It appears, however, that the phrase
is not to be found in the original document itself, but
proves to have been interpolated by Mr. Hall. The
term “
"antiqua custuma," having reference to the dues
of 1275, in fact occurs first in the Carta Mercatoria
itself. The “particulars ” of customs accounts use
the phrase new customs," La novel custume
or nova custuma," in reference to the grant of 1275,3
up to the very day on which the Carta Mercatoria was
issued. The original grant of 1275 does likewise,5
tho both Stubbs 6 and Mr. Hall” quote the Irish
grant written in Latin, in which no general designation
at all is found, in preference to the English grant in
French, which contains the proper caption new
customs."
Tho surprise has been expressed that the customs
of 1275 should have been called "new,"8 there is
really no occasion for it apart from the fact of non-
agreement with text-books. The simple explanation
is that the customs being called " new were
new," ,
1 Social England, vol. 11, p. 104; Custom-Revenue, vol i, pp 67, 159, vol. i1, p 90.
2 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. 11, p. 38 n. For the correct reading see Madox,
vol. 1, p. 784 n
3 MS K. R. Customs, 55/1 (Hull), ibid, 135/1 (Chichester). The latter doou-
ment is nearly half decayed, but the former 18 in an excellent state of preservation,
. For example, MS K. R. Customs, 55/8 "Rotulus Ricardı Oysel et Roberti
de Barton custodum nove custume domini Edwardi Regis Angliae Illustrn apud Kyuges.
ton super Hull a die Pentecost' anno Regni predicti E Regia Tricesimo primo."
5 MS. Fine Rolls, membs. 24 and 25; Parl. Writs, vol. i, p. 1.
6 Select Charters p. 441
7 Custom-Revenue, vol. 1, p. 200.
& Jenkes, Edward I, p 175.
9 The circumstances giving rise to the establishment of the customs of 1275 are
unknown. Sinclair (History of the Public Revenue, 3d ed., 1803, vol i, p. 109)
Hays that" Edward I . . . having seen during the course of his expedition to Palestine,
with what facility considerable gums of money were levied, by way of custom, in foreign
countries, he thought it would be a happy expedient for raising a revenue in his own
kingdom."
-
>
1

------
and remained so until still newer ones were introduced,
making those of 1275 seem old. The customs of 1275,
then, could not have been old customs re-enacted, could
not have been prise commutations confirmed by parlia-
ment.
Besides the exact name of the grant of 1275, it is
important to know the commodities included. This
would seem to present a matter of no difficulty, since
the documents specifically mention wool, wool-fells,
and hides. But modern interpretation has extended
the scope of the levy to include provisions and minerals
(tin and lead), and indeed all exports,? which gives
the dues of 1275 an importance and comprehensiveness
far beyond usual acceptance. But such a view is
untenable. The particulars of account” of the “ an-
cient customs from 1275 onwards exist in great
numbers, and never, among the scores which I have
read, does a single article occur except wool, wool-
fells, and hides.
It follows, then, that if prise commutations (tenths
and fifteenths) were collected from goods in general
(exported and imported), and the customs of 1275
from only three articles (exported), the grant of that
year could not have been a parliamentary confirmation
of the earlier dues. The customs of 1275 had, then,
no connection with the prise commutations, and the
latter had not only no beginning but (as well as there-
fore) no ending.
(d) Later history of the prise. It is maintained
that the new customs fixed by the Carta Mercatoria
ended the period of general prises or prise commuta-
1 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. 1, pp. 5, 66. cf. Antiquary, vol. vi, p. 211. Elsewhere
the same writer clearly confines the grant to the articles mentioned in the writ itself,
Ag in his Custom-Revenue, vol. i1, p. 88.
2 Stubbs, Const. History of England (ed 1875), vol 11, p. 523.

------
tions, so far as aliens were concerned. The charter
granted to the merchants of Aquitaine in 1302 2 specif-
ically states, and to a less degree, the more general,
as well as better known, Carta Mercatoria dated a few
months later, that the prises both on wines and on
other merchandise were henceforth to cease. The
accepted explanation of the new customs would be
unquestioned, if the prises referred to were systematic
prises on general merchandise of foreign trade. But
it has been indicated that no such system of prises
existed. The foreign merchants granted the king new
customs, not as a substitute system for prises except
in the case of wine, but in return for many privileges,
not the least of which, however, was the irregular
prize, exemption from the occasional seizure of their
goods in fairs, ports, and towns.
But according to what has become the orthodox
view, 4 these prises continued to be exacted from denizens,
who foolishly refused the new customs of 1302–03;
and they were abolished only under pressure from a
parliament of growing influence and power. In other
words, --- perhaps we may so put it, -- they continued
till a parliamentary system of customs had been worked
out between 1302-03 and 1347. But if the above ex-
planation of prises is correct, there were none to com-
mute, except those irregular prises and purveyances
which lasted down to modern times, or those systematic
1 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol 11, p. 119.
3
? Carta" de Libertatibus concessis Mercatoribus Vinetaris de Ducatu Aquitaniao,"
30 Aug., 30 Ed I. Red Book of the Exch, vol. 111, pp. 1060 ff The king agreed
not to exact any " priam vel quamcunque aliam vinorum vel aliorum mercimoniorum
except on immediate payment or satisfaction therefor.
8 Carta Mercatoria, Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. ii, p 204. The king consented
to make " nullam Prisam vel Artestacionem seu dilacionem occasione Prise de oetero
de Mercimonia, Mercandisis seu ahis Bonis" without immediate payment at the
market price. Cf. also ibid., pp. 207--208.
4 Cf. Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. ii, p. 134.

------
local prises and the regular prise on imported wine,
both of which likewise lasted to the modern period.
The burgesses of forty-two towns in 1303 refused the
new customs, not because they liked prises, but because
as conditions then were, they were subject to no prises
or any other regular dues except “the duties of old
due and accustomed," I which they were content to pay.
What these were will be seen below.
Every step of the argument is erroneous, – prise,
commuted prise (tenth and fifteenth), the all inclusive
("ancient”) customs of 1275, new customs of 1302-03
as commutation of prises due from aliens, the refusal
of denizens to commute in 1303, and the later decay of
prises due to the growth of parliamentary power.
-
II
LOCAL CUSTOMS
Local customs in England were much the same
as those on the Continent, except that in England
there was, of course, nothing quite analogous to the
local territorial system.
Of the numerous English local customs (consuetu-
dines) only a few are important here: river tolls,
passage dues, and town customs.
Of river tolls little is known except that they existed.
On the Thames there was an "Avalagium Thamisiae,
“Consuetudo Navium per Tamisam," theloneum
Maereni nostri cariati per avalagium Tamisiae." ?
Likewise at Abingdon each ship of Oxford using the
river paid its toll in fish.3
a
a
I Stubbs, Select Chartens, p. 490.
% Madox, vol 1, p. 775 (19 H. II and 32 H, III)
* Hjat. Mon. de Abingdon (R. S), vol 11, p. 119 (H. I)

------
passage." 2
Besides having to pay to cross a bridge, or use a
ferry, the traveller had to pay head-money,' or as it
was early called “
. This was a due either
for crossing a river: or passing through a port town,
and is as old as the Conquest at least. So important
was this toll that nearly all charters to towns and
monasteries contained exemptions from it.
It is the sea-port town dues, however, which are
of greatest interest here. These were of many kinds,
the chief of which may be put into more or less distinct
categories: first, such dues as murage and paviage
which were for local utilities; second, anchorage,
strandage, etc., for a special local privilege; third,
pesage, cranage, etc., for a local service rendered;
and last, the town toll, later called " custuma ville."
The "custuma ville" was the general town due
paid on goods for sale, for no special use, service, nor
privilege, but leviable as a local or municipal right.
It is to be compared and contrasted with the national
customs revenue, as the local customs par excellence,
to which all other town dues were subsidiary.
(
6
1 MS. K. R. Customs, 133/7 (Sandwich. 6-7 Eliz.). The “head-money " account
replaces the old *
passagium At times passage was on horses, carta, and merchan-
dise as well as on individuals. Abbreviatio Rot. Orig, vol i, p. 227 (Ed. II).
1
+
2 MS Eccl Com, Var , 44/159403 (1396-97). One farthing was charged in the
Account of the maner of Witney * for water passage at Babelak for the free passage
of the lord and his falcons for a year
• Records of the Borough of Nottingham, vol. 1, pp 2-5 (1155-65). A toll " de
omnibus Trentam transeuntibus."
• MS. K. R Customs, 157/12 (Sandwich, Ed I).
"Naves passagientes quando applica[ntes apud Sandwycum) quilibet homo nisi
sit de franchisa
(11 d)
Judeus dabit
[1111 d.)"
6 Domesday Book, vol. 1, p. 273.
6 Only goods for sale paid local customs. In the London list of dues Ed. I!] each
item has venalis" placed after it. MS. K. R. Customs, 193/3. The jury, too,
presented that tho the men of Southampton paid toll at the vil of Crydinton, they
never paid on goods there bought for their own use. Abbreviatio Placitorum, p. 210
(14 Ed. I).

------
The history of the “ custuma ville"
may be studied
from about the eighth century down to modern times,
in charters of grant and exemptions, general and
summary accounts of collectors, and legislative enact-
ments. But the history of the local customs has little
interest here apart from the following rough periods
of its development: 800–1100, inception and growth;
1100–1550, numerous exemptions; 1550---1835, great
decay on account of rise of prices and the spirit of
national economy; 1835 to the present, consolidation
and restoration.
Speculation as to the original source of the power
to impose local taxes is almost fruitless. During the
greater part of the first period, the crown successfully
maintained its prerogative right to grant such local
customs, and certainly from that time to the modern
period, that power has never been gainsaid. But on
the other hand, the locality had an activity and vitality
of its own, apart from the legal theory of sovereignty.
It would not be far wrong to say that whilst some
formulation came from above under the ægis of the
Roman law, nevertheless, the germination of the move-
ment was not only within the theory but independent
of it.1 As evidence of this there are numerous cases
of the unauthorized imposition of new tolls, the increase
in old rates, and the leagues of towns creating inter-
municipal free-trade unions.4
1 Cf the case of London, 1616. The citizens claimed that by virtue of charter they
"have and doe receive and take tolle and tailage and thoroughtoll,” but they hold
wheelage " by antient prescription and not by force of any graunto." MS. in Guild-
hall, London, Jor. C. C., vol xxxi, p. 49.
% Domesday Book, vol 1, pp 315, 375, 376, Bracton, De Legibus Angliae, vol. i,
p. 247 (inquiry concerning new levies of customs, a crown plea), Hundred Rolls, vol. i,
p. 133 b, State Trials of the Reign of Ed. I, pp 174-175 (1289-93),
322 H VIII, chap. 8, MS St P , Dom., Jac. I, vol lxxxvin, No 54.
4 Marlboro and Southampton, 23 H III, Gross, Gild Merchant, vol 11, pp. 173-174;
London and Winchester, 1304, ibid , p 258, Salisbury and Southampton, 1330. Ashley,
Economic History of England, vol ii, p 45, Nottingham, Coventry, and Lincoln,
15th century, ibid., Dunwich and Hull, 37 H. VI, M8. Add. Ch., 40680.
1

------
But difficult tho it be to estimate the part played
by the crown in the origin of the financial organization
of town economy, it is easy to estimate its part in the
gradual process of breaking down that system, which
came about to some extent through the practice of
exemptions. The system of exemptions was at once
the strength and weakness of the local customs. In
so far as the chief men of the town, either all the citizensi
or the members of the Gild Merchant,2 were exempt
from the local customs, a powerful force was created
for their continuance, since it was also the continuance
of an exemption of considerable importance to those
favored. Hand in hand with this went the exemption
from the customs of other towns, which was ample
reason on the part of the favored for the whole system,
but obviously weakened it as a financial system. Of
greater importance in the undermining of the local
system was the practice of granting exemptions to
religious houses 4 and organizations, as well as to
tenants on the royal demesne 6 and other private
individuals. In all, the list of exemptions was so
1
I Charter of London, H I, in Stubbs, Select Charters, p 103, Ipswich, 1200, Gross,
Gıld Merchant, vol 11, p 115 Cf. Ghent, 1199, Warnkonig, vol 11, p. 20.
* E. g., Leicester, 1278, Records of Leicester (ed Bateson), 1103-1327, p 171.
Cf. St. Omer, 1127, Giry, p. 372
8 E. 8. Dover, 1066, Domesday Book, vol 1, p1a, exemption from toll throughout
England, London (
HI), Stubbe, Select Charters, p. 103, Nottingham, 1189, Records
of Nottingham (od Stevenson), vol. 1, p 9 Cf. exemption of the men of the church
of Strasburg, 775, Keutgen, Urk. zur Stat. Verfassungsgesch., p 40; also the exemptions
of Flemish towns in Warnkonig, vol. 11, pt. 2, p. 4, Dam, 1180, p 72, Furnes, 1176, p. 9,
Nieuport, 1168, p. 91
Beverley received, temp H, I, exemption from tolls throughout Yorkshire, Gross,
Gıld Merchant, vol. ii, p. 21,
* E 8, Abingdon, Hist Mon. de Abingdon, p 218 (H. II), Christchurch, Canter-
bury, Cal Pat R., Ed. I, vol 1, p. 344 (1279), Kemble, Saxons in England, vol 11, pp
75–76, cf. Keutgen, Urk zur Stat. Verfassungsgesch., p 50 (1149).
5 Notably the Templarg, Rot. Cart., vol. i, p. 1 (1199).
& Abbreviatio Placitorum, p. 305 b (2 Ed. II); Close R , No. 217 (4 John, 1 R. II);
Select Cases in the Star Chamber (Selden Soc.), p. 121 (1517),
7 Davies, History of Southampton, pp. 228-230.

------
considerable 1 that it was chiefly aliens, and a few of
the poorer denizens without the town who paid the
town customs.
If we were to compare the local customs of 1200
with those of 1900, we should note that, while at the
earlier date, there were many exemptions, at the latter
date there were practically none; that many dues of
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries were later con-
solidated, and that the local rates on such goods as
bore both local and national customs were much higher
in proportion at the earlier date than at the later.
In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, as now,
the local rate was lower than the national,
Local
[London, Ed I)
Sandwich, 6 Eliz
8
0.8%
08%
National
Fifteenth of John
Poundage of 1302–03.
Poundage of Ed III.
Poundage of 15th cent.
6.6%
12%
2.5%
50%
But this difference is not at all essential, resulting as
it did from the fact that the local tax was fixed at an
earlier date than the national, that is, much before the
rise of prices of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Just as national tariffs discriminate against nations,
so local tariffs discriminated against towns. For in-
stance Dunwich charged one shilling more on a ship of
Walberswick than on one from Southwold. This local
discrimination might take the form of favoring a
1 Boys, History of Sandwich, p. 440. Exempt in Sandwich (13th century?) were.
(a) those of the Cinque Ports and their members, (b) those scot and lot of Canter-
bury, (c) as well as of London, (d) the people of the archbishop of Canterburv, (e) the
pot-boilers of the archbishopric, (f) those of the hundred of Milton, (g) those of Battle,
(h) St. Albans, (1) Antwerp, () Gynes (Guines), and (k) Sir Ingeram de Fyesnez.
2 Some aliens were also exempt, for instance, the merchants of Scotland, 1237;
Hohlbaum, Hans. Urkundenbuch, vol. i, & 281.
3 MS K. R Customs, 193/3. Rates specific. * Et sic de qualibet alia mercandiga
superius non nominata precii xx s. --- ud."
« MS. K. R. Customs, 133/7,
$MS. Add. Roll, 40736 (19-20 Ed. I).

------
foreign town or nation against an English town, as
in the case of Sandwich, which charged more on fish
going towards the Thames (to London) than on fish
going to France or elsewhere abroad; the idea appar-
ently being to tax all non-freemen engaging in the Lon-
don trade very heavily so as to reserve that trade for
the burgesses of the town.
This discrimination leads us to the essential difference
between national and local customs. The former were
only on foreign trade, and the latter on all trade in and
out of the town, regardless of political boundaries.
To this difference must be added the fact that while
national customs rates were determined by the central
government, the local rates, no matter what the ulti-
mate source of the imposition, depended upon local
organization for their working out, for they were the
dues which custom had imposed, and differed as
between town and town in particulars, tho inter-town
and inter-port trade tended to level the discrepancies
of rates.
It is evident, then, that local customs, the "petty
customs” of the towns, were distinct in nature from
the national customs. Byno stretch of the imagination
or misinterpretation of facts can the local customs
be expanded into national customs. Yet it is in part
the thesis of this paper that no account of the origins
of the national system can be adequate without taking
the local system into consideration. Whilst the
national customs-revenue was not based upon the local,
the latter system was the most important single element
affecting the early development of the national system.
ud.
1 MS KR Customs, 157/12 (ca 1300).
Lasta allecium versus Tamisiam
Item versus Franciam
M de Makerel versus Tamigiam
Versus partes transmarinas
1111 d.
xd.
11 d."

------
USTOMS REVENUE OF ENGLAND
124
III
SEMI-NATIONAL CUSTOMS 1050-1275
The formulation of the problem connected with
the origin of the national customs system is very
simple: what were the earliest dues upon foreign trade
imposed by the king in his political capacity; that
is, customs levied on goods exported and imported,
and collected at the ports generally, in ports of private
franchise as well as in those of the demesne ?
The immediate task is to examine the early dues
which, wholly or in part, answer to this formula. It
is not to be expected that the purely national customs
are to be found in the earliest times when the local
system was predominant; but on the other hand,
national elements are discoverable which deserve a
prominent place in the history of custom origins. .
Four customs in this connection are important: lastage,
scavage, wine customs, and prise of wines, all of which
partake of the nature of both local and national cus-
toms. For lack of a better phrase, I call them semi-
national.
(a) Lastage. Some half dozen meanings of lastage
have been collected, three of which are of interest
here. It has been defined by lexicographers, medieval 2
and modern, as well as by modern historians 4 and
editors of texts, as a custom exacted in fairs and
3
(6
1 New Oxford Dictionary, s v. "Lastage
2
Liber de Hyda, p. 44, Expositiones vocabulorum, Red Book of the Exch., vol.
111, p 1033.
· Spelman, Glossarium (ed 1687), p. 351, Du Cange, 8 v
Lastage"
Speed, History of Southampton (ed Aubrey), p 237 .; Introduction to the Pipe
Rolls, vol 111, p 85, Walford, Fairs, Past and Present, p. 20.
?

------
5
markets."i But I have found no clear example of such a
use in any contemporary records or accounts of fair
dues;2 and at times in the records lastage is even set
apart from and contrasted with the fair dues. Another
meaning given to lastage is ballastage, or a payment
for the privilege of taking in ballast. That this was
one of the uses of the term, there is no doubt. But
the lastage of moment here was not a fair due, not
collected inland but " along the sea-coast,"
a due
paid by ships leaving port with cargoes of regular
merchandise not of ballast-stones, and not paid at a
rate of so much per ton or per ship, but at a specific
rate on each article.6
The earliest occurence of this lastage is in the Chester
customs of the time of the Confessor. In the Pipe
?
Rolls it is often found, as in 1130,8 1155-56, 1157–58,
1158–599, 1171–72,10 and so on into the thirteenth cen-
tury.11 The towns mentioned are all on the sea-coast:
Exeter, Hastings, Bosham, and Sandwich.
«
1 Thorpe, Ancient Laws and Institutes, Glossary, Gross, Gıld Merchant, vol. 11,
p. 409, Riley, Liber Custumarum, vol 11, p 812 "A custom exacted in markets and
fairs, for licence to carry goode from place to place, in the form of a package or last."
2 Tolls at the fair of St Giles, Winchester, 1297-98 gate tolls, magnum pondus,
terragium, bovagium, seldagium, entrance and other dues MS Eccl Com, Var.,
27/159317. Cf bid , 23/159286 (1292-93), MS. K R Accounts, 507/2 (17 Ed II).
For St. Ives, see MS Cart. Harl, 58, 1 (10), 30 H. III, Gross, Las Merchant
(Selden Soc), I.
* Pipe R , H. I, p 153. "De Lestagio Civitatie [Exonie) 60$ , De Feria Exonie 60s."
* Godefroi, Dictionnaire, s v * Lestage", Palmer's Continuation of Manship's
Hist. of Yarmouth, p. 7.
5 Grose, Gıld Merchant, vol. 11, p 279 (1200).
• MS. K. R. Customs, 16/17, Skubeck (Boston, 1323), ibid., 124/6 Sandwich,
1302 03
"Si vero cum pace et licentia regis venisset, qui in ea erant quiete vendebant
quae habebant Sed cum discederet, riii denarios de unoquoque Lesth habebant rex
et comes." Domesday Book, vol i, p 262 b. See also a manuscript of the year 1852
in the Lynn Archives (nondescript) which places the origin at the time of Stephen,
8 Pipe Roll, H. J, pp. 91, 153.
• Ibid., pp. 48, 61 (2 H. II), 78, 79 (3 H. II), 131, 158, 159, 182 (4 H. II)
10 Ibid, 18 H, II, p. 98.
11 Rot. Can., 3 John, p. 214; MS. Pipe R., L.T.R., No. 50, m. 78 (John); ibid.,
No. 62, m 9A (2 H, III).
1

------
The lastage of at least four towns, Boston, Lynn,
Yarmouth, and Ipswich, was in the hands of the
Hauville family, where it continued apparently about
a century following the year 1217, and in case of
Yarmouth was still in private hands in the year 21
Richard II (1397-98). The tenure of this fee was the
serjeanty of receiving the king's presents, especially
falcons.3
It is difficult to decide, owing to the badly arranged
text of Liber Albus, whether this fast disappearing
due was collected at London. Under the caption
“ Tronage,” we find the first section dealing, not with
the tronage of wool, but another custom on wool, etc.,
taken out of London to the parts beyond sea, by
merchants liable to custom." 4
Thus it appears that lastage was collected at nine
ports, and perhaps ten, all the way around the coast
from Boston to Chester.
It happens that there have been handed down a
list of lastage rates of about thirty different commodities
for Skirbeck (Boston), and lastage accounts of the
closing years of Edward I, for Sandwich. From these
the nature of lastage may be determined. According
to the Skirbeck document, lastage arose from divers
merchandises carried out of England to parts beyond
1
1 Ralph of Yarmouth, in 1217, conveyed his right to lastage in Norfolk, Suffolk, and
Lincolnshire to Henry de Hauville Palmer's Continuation of Manship's Hist of
Yarmouth, p. 7 In 1318, Robert de Walkefare was pardoned for acquiring in fee,
without licence, the lastage of Skırbeck (Boston) from Thomas de Hauville Cal. Pat.
R, Ed. II, vol 111, p. 114. Cf. also Cal of Inq, 1,88 281, 337, 381 (39 and 40 H. III);
ibid , vol ſ381 (8 Ed. I); Inquisitio ad Q.D. 135/10 (12 Ed. II), K. R. Customs,
16/17a (17 Ed II).
1 MS. Harl, 1878, 25.
1 Cal. of Inq., vol 1, $ 281; Abbreviatio Placitorum, p 285.
1 Liber Albus, vol. 1, p. 226.
MS. K. R. Customs, 16/178. In Sandwich it seems that not so many goods
paid lastage, the chief being wool, hides, butter, cheese, bacon, and fish MS. K. R.
Customs, 124/12 (31-32 Ed. I).
& Ibid., 124/5, 14.
I

------
seas.
11
And in the Sandwich accounts we see the
three layers of customs, custuma ville, lastagium, and
the nova custuma of 1302-03, all at times due upon the
same articles of trade. Take an alien merchant export-
ing goods as an example. He paid custuma ville on all
his goods, lastage upon the chief natural products of the
country, and also the new customs on all his wares.2
Lastage resembled the local customs in that there
were many exemptions in favor of the burgesses of
numerous English towns, and of foreign merchants.
Then too, as has been seen, it was put to farm, like
local tolls, and granted out as fees. But lastage was
not a local toll, not the custuma ville on exports, for
the same goods going abroad paid both lastage and
custuma ville, and indeed the rates were not the same,
tt
1 "Provenit ex diversis mercimoniis transfretantibus extra Angliam ad partea
transmarinas.* MS. K. R. Customs, 16/179 Cf. Abbreviatio Placitorum, p. 285
(19 Ed. I). "Quandam consuetudinem vocatam lestagium de mercandızis usque partes
exteras transeuntibus'
1
241
21
1
Recepta custume de Sandwyco
“De Dyoni910 Bell de Ipre pro IX dolus vini IIIs , pro IIII saccia Lane VIIId,
pro II balið alluciorum VIIId., pro I granario Wode IIII "
" De Johanne Froydecoaine pro I bala Pannı IIIId , pro II saccis Lane IIIId"
* Recepta custume Lastagn de Sandwyco
* De Dyonißio Belle de Ipre pro IIII saccis Lane XVId."
"De Johanne Froydecusine pro II saccis Lane VIIId." (K R Customs, 124/14.
Mich 32 Ed I- Mich 32 Ed I)
Particule Nove Custume recepte apud Sandwycum, Custuma lanarum, pellium
lanutarum, et coriorum de regno eductorum »
De Dionisio Bella de Iapre pro IIII daccig et III clavibus Lane --- XIIIs. VId qa."
De Johanne Fredecosyn pro Il sacois Lane VIs VIIId" (Accounts dealing with
other articles exported are missing MS K R Customs 124/13 Mich. 32 Ed I
Mich 33 Ed. I)
11
11
13
3 London, Stubbs, Select Charters, p 103 (HI), Norwich, Rec of Norwich (ed.
Hudson), vol 1, p. 12 (1194); Lincoln, Rot Chart , vol 1, p 4a (1199)
111
4 The men of St Omer sint quieti per totam Angliam undecumque venerint,
de lestagio," Gıry, St Omer, p 381 (1154-62)
In Skarbeck the jury said "Iate predicte consuetudines percipiendae sunt de
omnibus hominibus cum predictis rebus transfretantibus exceptis hominibus de Gutland,
de Fryseby in Fruseland, de Northweya, de Scocia, de Hibernia, de Colonia, et de
hominibus de London, et de pluribus alus mercatoribus, videlicet, Johanne Martyn
de Setham et alus" (MS K. R Customs, 16/178 (1323))
* MS. K. R. Customa, 124/5 (27 Ed. I), and 124/14 (32-33 Ed I).

------
tho the variation was not considerable. Hence we
are forced to make a new category for lastage. In
the two essentials of foreign trade and political imposi-
tion it was a national due; but in secondary character-
istics, exemptions and feudation, it was local.
Lastage, then, was a semi-national customs-due.
(6) Scavage. Scavage was a custom, as Liber Albus
twice makes known, due only on wares imported from
abroad. From a list of merchandise imported from
the Continent on which scavage was due, we learn
that it was levied only on foreign goods, such as spices,
fruits, mercery, etc. Like lastage, it was collected
only on articles of foreign trade and was payable
originally to the king. But unlike lastage, it seems
4
to have been confined to London. At least it seems
not to have had general application elsewhere, tho
the term is treated in a medieval glossary as if of general
use. As in the case of lastage, there were many who
owed no scavage, and since those who paid it were
forced to live with hosts, we may conclude that it was
non-freemen who were liable, tho it is clear that some
1
Custuma ville
1d
Articles
Lastage
Bacong, each
1d.
Cheese, wey
1d
Herringa, last
id
Hides, dicker
2d
Wool, sack
4d.
MS K R. Customs, 124/12 Sandwich, 31-32 Ed. I
1d.
4d
2d.
2d
1 Vol 1, pp 225, 230
1
3 Laber Albus, vol 1, p. 223 Spelman (Glossarium, ed 1687, p. 503) defined
Bc&vage as "Tributum quod a mercatoribus exigere solvent nundinarum domini,
ob licentiam proponendi ibidem venditioni mercimonia. Cf. Du Cange, e v.
Os
tensio," and Thorpe, Ancient Laws and Institutes, Glossary
* Laber Albus, vol. 1, p. 223.
5 "Scheauwyng, id est, Propositio mercimoni Gallice, Diepleyure de marchandise."
Liber de Hyda, p. 43; Shewite --- Quite de moustraunce de marchandise" Red
Book of the Exch, vol. 111, p 1033.
16
# Liber Albus, vol. 1, p. 225.

------
aliens were specially exempt. In the thirteenth cen-
tury, the rating was so much per load, or per "kark of
marchandise.”2 At a later date it consisted of many
minute and varying rates.3
The history of scavage can be followed from about
the period of the Conquest to modern times. It comes
to light for the first time in an obscure list of " customs
of Billingsgate," ! the date of which is uncertain but
may be assigned to the eleventh century. During
the following century, it was mentioned in a charter
given to St. Omer. In 52 Henry III (1267-68), it
was accounted for in the Pipe Roll.? And in a list of
London customs of the late thirteenth century, it is set
forth at considerable length. It seems to have been
due at Billingsgate, Queenhythe, and Dowgate, that is,
wherever ships importing goods landed their cargoes.
But what chiefly interests us is the combination of
national and local characteristics, which enables us to
place it in the same category as lastage.
(c) Ancient wine custom. This due has been at
least thrice noted by others, firstly, as " in the nature
1 The merchants of Lorraine paid no other " escawenge
except the
Hoblbaum, Hans Urkundenbuch, vol 111, $ 602 (ca. 1150) The merchants
of Germany" were exempt. Liber Albus, vol 1, p 225-226. The men of St Omer were
likewise freed from scawinga in London Charter of H II to St. Omer. Gıry,
St Omer, p 381 (1154-62)
2 Liber Albus, vol 1, pp. 223-224, 230
8 E &, MS Galba, C 1, fol 228 ff (H VIII), Rates of the Custome House,
1590, pp 476-52; MS Br M, 12497 (1594), Birch, Hist Chartera of London,
pp 212 ff. (Car I), unspecified goods to pay ld per £.
Hogge, Leodium, et Nivella, qui per terras ibant, ostensionem (scavage]
dabant et teloneum" Hohlbaum, Hans Urkundenbuch, vol 1, $ 2.
It may be that
19 referred to in Domesday Book vol 262b in the
Chester customs "Si habentes martrinas pelles juberet praepositus regis ut null;
venderent donec sibi prius ostensas compararet"
5 Hohlbaum, Hans. Urkundenbuch, vol. 1, $ 2, vol 111, $ 599. The date is here
glven as about the last third of the 11th century
B Giry, St. Omer, p 381 (1154-62)
7 75£. 68, 10d “de consuetudinibus omnimodum mercandısarum venientium
de partibus transmariis ad Civitatem praedictam, de quibus consuetudo debetur
quae vocatur Scavagium." Madox, vol 1, p 779 n.
& Liber Albus, vol. 1, p. 223.
3
16
wine cus-
tom "
11
11
ostensio
1,

------
2
of a port due” i (8d. per tun), secondly, as an excise
(1d. per tun) and a local due, and thirdly, as broker-
age. But it seems that these views are not merely
contradictory; they are all incorrect.
This wine custom was in reality an import duty
payable in money and called as well " escawenge,"
or scavage, as “la custume del vin," and existed at
least as early as about 1150 in London. In the
London scavage rates of the sixteenth century wine is
listed at 2d. per tun, a rate which was also given to
the out ports, and probably to the metropolis, by
Henry III. Two definite wine import duties were
recognized by Henry III, one the recta prisa, and the
other " the customs of pence imposed upon every tun
in the divers ports." 8 And in 1302, in the charter
of liberties granted to the merchants of Aquitaine, a
2s. butlerage was substituted for the ancient prise, but
this was "over and above the ancient customs due and
accustomed to be paid in money either to us or to
others.'', This was repeated in the Carta Mercatoria, 10
Whilst the local due on wine was 4d. per tun,11
this due was from the time of Henry III, as has been
seen, only 2d. Tho information about this wine duty
is scanty indeed, it seems fairly clear that it was a part
of an early national customs system, a duty paid in
1 Stubbs, Const History of England, vol 11, p 550.
> Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol 1, p 7; vol. 11, pp. 93, 109
1 Bateson, Eng] Hust Rev , vol wii, p 498.
• Hohlbaum, Hans. Urkundenbuch, vol. 111, $ 602 The men of Lorraine
durront autre escawenge fors la custume del vin ceo est le cornage V [or II ?] deners de
chesun tonel" E HR, vol xvii, p 501.
* Rates of the Custome House, Br M, C 40, b 29 (1590)
• Cal CR , H III, 1227-31, p. 153 (1229).
7 Liber Albus, vol. 1, p 228 (ca H III ?)
8 Cal Pat R., H. III, 1247-58, p 370 (1254), cf. ibid , in, 294 (1253-54).
$ Red Book of the Exch., vol. 111, p 1063.
10 Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. ii, pp. 202 ff.
11 MS. Claud. D, x, pp 182b ff. (Sandwich), Woodruff, Hist of Fordwich, p. 32,
MS. K. R. Customs, 137/10 (Southampton, 13-14 Ed III), cf. ibid , 137/11 and 12.
.
ne
2

------
the ports generally, in privatel as well as royal
franchise, one in which the crown had a special interest,
and never classed with local customs. Nevertheless
it seems to have partaken of the local system in so far
as local exemptions were concerned. It is not improb-
able that this money duty on wine is all that has
come down to us of a scavage originally due in the
outports as well as in London.
(d) The prise of wines. The prise of wines comes
to light apparently for the first time about 1150, in the
regulations for the men of Lorraine coming to London.
"And if it is a ship, they will take two 4 tuns behind
the mast, and one before, the best for as much as they
sell the mean. And the mean for as much as they sell
the worst. And if it is a hulk or other boat, one tun
before and another behind, the best for as much as
they sell the mean. And the mean for as much as they
sell the worst." 5
From this document it appears that the amount
of wine which the king might take was fixed according
to the size of the ship. It is also to be noted that the
king was to buy his wine at a little below the market
price. It is not assumed that he will always buy the
best, and indeed since some of it would doubtless be
for his servants, why should he have done so, especially
23
1 For example at Sandwich, in 1229 Cal Ci R., H III, 1227–31, p. 153.
2 As at London Hans Urkundenbuch, vol ui, & 602 (ca 1150). Also the porta
of Yorkshire (?) "De Cs et VII: et IXd et ob de denarus captis de vino, scilicet de
Tonello IIIID Madox, vol. i, p. 774 n (Michaelmas, 12 Joha to Mid-Lent following).
& Liber Albus, vol. i, p 228 (c. H. III ?).
4 The Liber Ordinacionum, f. 101 b (E. H. R, vol xvii, p 500) has a corrupt
reading From the ship three tuns were due, and from the hulk four
& "Egico est chiel, il prendrunt deus tonels bas le tonge, e un devant, le meillur
pur altretant cum lom vendra le meein Et le meein pur altretant cum lom vendra
le pelur
E si co est hulk, u altre nef, un tunel devant o altre deriere, le meillur pur
altretant cum lum vendra le meien E le meen pur altretant cum lom vendra le
peiur
E H. R, vol
xvu, p 500
This is a better text than that printed by Riley
or Höhlbaum
The date given by Hohlbaum and M188 Bateson is about a century
earlier than that assigned by Riley.

------
when he had to pay for it? This regulation, or
law as it was called, was for the king's benefit, a
guarantee against extortion on the part of the merchant.
At about the same time, Rouen received a charter
which laid down the principle that no wine duty was
to be given in Rouen except wine itself.' And in
1199, John's charter to that town granted to the citizens
certain privileges but stated that they should be sub-
ject to his prise of wines in London, which was defined
as the pre-emption of only so much wine as was neces-
sary for the king's use, that is “ for his own drinking,
or for giving away as he will, but not for selling." 2
The wine prise so well known in history was the
recta prisa. The earliest specific occurence found of
this phase is of the year 1202. Whilst the prise of
1150 was definite in amount, it was not fixed as to
price. It is probable that some time in the reign of
Henry II an assize, now lost, was issued, fixing for all
England the price which the king should pay for his
wine, 15s. in Bristol, and 20s. elsewhere,4 and likewise
standardizing the amount for all ships at one tun
before the mast and one after.5 So that a mala
prisa of wines would be the pre-emption of more
than one or two tuns, either at the regular price or
otherwise, or the pre-emption of one or two tuns at
any other than the "right prise."
Even at the time of the determination of the recta
prisa, no idea of a tax could have prevailed at all.
ri
1 Chéruel, Histoire de Rouen, vol 1, p 241 ff., Round, Calendar of Documents in
France, vol 1, pp. 32-33.
2 Round, Calendar of Documents in France, vol 1, p 36
3 "De vinia praedictis nullam prisam capiatis, praeterquam rectam prisam nostram.
Madox, vol. 1, p. 767.
MS. K. R. Accounts, 352/15 (15–17 Ed I), ibid , 77/18 (8 Ed. II).
* Liber Custumarum, vol i, pp. 252-253 (53 H. III), Fleta (ed. 1647), 80 (ca. 1290).
& There were taken for instance from Gascon merchants 27+ tuns @ 20s., and 373
tuns @ 24 marks, "ad opus nostrum." Rot. Lit Ci, vol. 1, p. 5 (1204).
7

------
At the time of the assize, 20s. per tun would not have
been much, if at all, below an average price. The
duty on wine at the time was not the recta prisa but
the ancient wine customs above considered. Time
brought about a rise in prices and the recta prisa
became a real tax. The recta prisa as a tax is histori-
cally an accident. The king became the beneficiary
of an unearned increment.
The later history of the prise is well known. It was
commuted into a money payment by the merchants
of Aquitaine in 1302, and by aliens in general in 1302-
03.3 Only in the eighteenth century were denizens
freed from the obligation.
The simple facts of importance in the early history
of this prise have thus been stated. It remains to be
seen what the accepted theory of wine prises is, for
that theory is of importance in so far as it forms the
analogy on which the general prise theory is founded.
Briefly, this accepted theory is as follows. Three
distinct stages of development are found. (1) The
first saw the king purchasing as much wine as he
needed at a price “ far below" the market value,
“at the most, for half its market value." 6 But as
already seen, both the amount taken and the price
were in fact limited, the former fixed according to
the size of the ship, and the latter rated in definite
terms of the market price. (2) Whilst in the first
stage apparently aliens and denizens were lumped
together, in the second stage they parted company.
1 John's assize of wines, 1199, practically our only source of evidence, placed the
maximum price of the wine of Poitou at 20s. per tun, of Anjou at 248., and of France
Hovedon, vol iv, p. 99
* Carta de Libertatibus, Red Book of the Exch , vol ini, pp 1060 ff.
• Carta Mercatoria, Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol. ii, pp. 202 ff.
Hall, Custom-Revenue, vol 11, pp 90–92.
5 Ibid., p. 63.
proper at 255

------
or
The denizens were subjected to a prise definite in
amount, about a tenth, at the king's price. This
was the recta prisa. But such is really a misconception
of the term. The prise was "right," not so much
,
because it was definite in amount (it had been so before,
tho now that amount was standardized), as because the
price per tun was fixed independently of market price.
Stubbs originally defined the recta prisa with approxi-
mate correctness, but yielding to criticism, substituted
the incorrect explanation, which has gained accep-
tance in other standard works.4
Not only has the recta prisa been wrongly defined
as a prise of wines at the king's price, but it is even
described as if it were an out and out taking,"
seizure without payment. And indeed it has been
remarked that “it is new to find that the king was
expected at one time to pay for the wines of his butler-
The prise was of course first and last a pur-
chase of wines, differing from other purchases only in
that it was official and took place according to prescribed
rules. It is, again, a part of the theory that, in the
second phase, aliens fined to the crown, in the shape
of licence money, either in a "lump sum for the whole
cargo," or as a fixed toll,” so much per tun. Not
an iota of evidence is cited to support this hypothesis.
No trace of such a toll has been found accounted for
in the Pipe Rolls or in the Wardrobe accounts. And
up to the time when the men of Aquitaine substituted
age." 7
t
1 Const History of England (ed. 1875), vol. 11, p. 522.
% Hall, Antiquary, vol. v1 (1882), p. 65; Custom-Revenue, vol. i, p 6
& Const History of England (4th ed.) vol 11, p. 550.
E & Cunningham, English Industry and Commerce (4th ed.), vol. 1, p. 279.
Hall, Antiquary, vol. vi (1882), p 65.
• Cunningham, English Industry and Commerce (4th ed ), vol. 1, p 279; Meredith,
Economic History of England, p. 72.
> Bateson, English Hist. Rev , vol xvii, p. 497.
9

------
2
a money due for the prise, the prise itself was taken.
(3) For denizens, the third and last phase (in this
theory) saw no change. They were still subject to
the wine prise as before. For aliens, however, the
" commuted toll” was « fixed.” But this is an
impossible conclusion, if, as is here maintained, there
was no such previous commutation.
In sum, the prise theory, even as applied to wine,
where it seems strongest, will not stand the test.
Only one shred of fact remains: alien's wine prise was
the progenitor of what was later called butlerage. To
enlarge this into a general system, to give the prise a
general application, is to make the exception the rule.
But the importance, for the present subject, of the
wine prise is not only in its connection with later
customs but also in its place in the customs system
of its own time. Since the prise was due from imported
wine only, and was imposed by the crown in most
ports of England, it formed a part of the national
customs system. On the other hand, in many ports of
private franchise, if not in all, the prise of wines was
at one time or another in the hands of the lord of the
franchise; for example, in Sandwich, Fordwich,
Lynn, and Hull. And it is precisely here that we
'Rotulus Guageri et vinorum de prisa venientium ad diversos portua Anglie"
MS. K. R. Accounts, 77/10 (29-30 Ed I) In this account the ships of Bayonne were
subject to the wine prise. The account itself actually runs to St Edmund's day,
nearly two months after the abolition of the prise on the wine of the men of Aquitaine,
by the Carta de Libertatibus, 30 Aug , 30 Ed I Red Book of the Exch , vol. 111, pp.
1061 ff.
% A freeman of London, in order to prove his right to exemption from the wing
prise, was to swear that the had bought the wine beyond seas. Rotuli Seleoti
(ed. Hunter), p. 32 (7 John).
3 MS. K. R. Customa, 157/12 (ca 1300), MS Claud D, 1, pp. 182 b ft. Sand-
wich tolls were in the possession of Christ Church of Canterbury
4 Woodruff, History of Fordwich, p. 34. Tolle here belonged to the monastery
of St. Augustine, Canterbury.
Lynn archives, MS. E e, 5 (38 Ed. III) The bailiff of the bishop of Norwich and
Roger de Monte Alto had no claim "in praedictis prisis nisi tantomodo de vinis"
6 MS. K. R. Accounts, 78/4a (2-3 Ed. III). “Excepting the prises which the lord
Archbishop (of York] collects in the aforesaid port [of Hull] by the king'a writ, the
customs on wines there have wholly ceased "
3
1

------
see the local overlap the national system; provided,
of course, the lord of the franchise collected the wine
prise without a special privilege to that effect. This,
however, seems doubtful, tho it is certain that the
archbishop of York based his rights in Hull upon an
Anglo-Saxon charter antedating the origin of the
prise itself.
Again, exemptions from the prise were considerable
in so far as the men of London ? and the Cinque Ports 3
were not liable in their own ports, or in any other
ports in England. On the other hand, as the accounts
show, there was no exemption for men of the ancient
demesne as such. From this two conclusions follow:
(a) the institution of the prise does not go so far back
as the Conquest, and (b) since the men of the ancient
demesne were exempt from local tolls, the prise of
wines does not belong wholly to the local system, much
as the local system may have influenced it. That the
prise was in danger of being treated simply as a local
due is seen from the fact that the crown made special
efforts against its collection on wines disposed of in
the coast trade. This danger arose largely from the
fact that the nature of the national customs in the
hands of the lords of franchises was imperfectly under-
stood.
In brief, the wine prise may be designated as essen-
tially national, but considerably affected by the local
system.
1 Cal CIR , Ed. III, vol 1, pp 51-52 (1327)
2 Rotuli Selecti (ed Hunter), p 32 (7 John), cf Red Book of the Excb., vol 111,
P. 1035. “Forefeng "
3 Cal Cl R , Ed I, vol 1, p 22 (1273), Cal Ch R , Ed I, vol 11, p 344 (1290).
1
Only the cittyzens of London, and those of the V portz are exempt m
prisage, but no other englishe” MS Harl 1878, fol 152 (ca. 17th cent ). Cf. MS.
K. R. Accounts, 84/27 (23 H VII), 86/3 (8-9 H VIII), 87/25 (4 & 5-5 & 6 P. & M.
* E. g. Cal Cl R, H III, vol 111, p 420 (1237).
1

------
If the description of the above several dues is correct,
there existed in the twelfth century or earlier a more
or less complete set of national customs, some of which
continued locally down to modern times, but most of
which early but gradually sank into desuetude before
the later and better known customs. This was facili-
tated by the great rise of prices in the thirteenth
century,' which reduced the importance of the existing
customs and made the introduction of others possible.
Their decay was furthered by the fact that no special
machinery had been created for their supervision.
Hand in hand with this went the all-powerful localism
of the time. Following the first group, the local customs,
was this second set of "ancient customs," hitherto un-
recognized, which, however, are those mentioned in the
Magna Carta, Carta Mercatoria, and other documents
of the period.
Once this analysis of the ancient customs is accepted
there is no room for the prise theory with its accom-
panying commutations and indefinite tolls. A faithful
student of the medieval financial history of England
has expressed some impatience with the accounts of
the ancient customs. "We have heard," he writes,
of imposts of 10 per cent and 73 per cent (tenths
and fifteenths) on divers articles; of a primeval duty
of 4d. or 8d. on the tun of wines; of the king's Prisage
of wines. But the notices were too scattered to
enable us to give any connected view of the whole." 2
The account of the customs given above explains why
they are “scattered;" nothing else is to be looked for
in the debris left by the conflict of systems and ideas,
local and national.
46
.
1 This subject will receive special treatment on another occasion.
* Ramsay, Dawn of the Constitution, p. 314.

------
STUNS-REVENUE OF ENGLAND
143
IV
THE CUSTOMS EXPERIMENT OF KING JOHN
1
The well-known fifteenths of history have been
either tallages or general taxes on moveables. The
fifteenth of John, of interest here, an innovation and
experiment of that king, was an ad valorem tax on
foreign trade imposed by the crown and of general
application throughout England. It has already been
seen that the fifteenth as a prise commutation is a
myth, and the statement that "customs on general
merchandise were collected in the shape of a fifteenth
or other sum levied very much as a toll or licence to
trade," 1 is beside the mark. The fifteenth was neither
licence money, nor was it found except for a few years
in the reign of John. The fifteenth was likewise
not on
both lands and goods," 2 but on goods alone
and only when exported or imported. Apart from
the historians quoted, apparently only two have more
than noted the fifteenth, Madox, who printed some
accounts, and Faber, who gave a summary of the
regulations. Otherwise this notable attempt of John
to found a new customs system seems to have been
forgotten. At the time when John was in desperate
straights for money and daily losing ground in France,
he not only resorted to irregular levies upon articles of
trade, but also introduced the new ad valorem tax, the
fifteenth. This made its appearance, more precisely,
June 4, 1203. It probably disappeared sometime be-
16
---
1 Stubbs, Conet History of England (4th ed.), vol. ii, p 550
* Thompson, Collections of Boston, p. 101.
• History and Antiquities of the Exchequer, vol 1, pp. 771-773.
* Agrarschutz in England, pp. 62–64.

------
tween the ninth and twelfth2 years (1207--10) of the
same reign.
The Great Winchester Assize of Customs, which
outlines the whole system, was enrolled as a letter
patent, and is among the earliest of its kind preserved
in England, tho the original roll is in places now much
less legible than the printed document. The essential
features of the new system may be briefly summarized.
It was decreed " by the advice of our liegemen” that
all merchants shall pay to the king a fifteenth of their
merchandise exported or imported; that in each port
six or more collectors be elected who are to be under
the control of the chief custodians of the fifteenth;
that the usual machinery of common chest, tallies,
and chirographs be adopted; that special provision be
made for coast-traders, who are to find security for the
performance of their legitimate functions; 4 and that
the exportation of victuals and other specified com-
modities be forbidden unless under licence.
Altho but little importance is to be attached to the
phrase "by the advice of our liegemen," still its pres-
ence indicates that some attempt was made to secure
the sanction of officials or magnates. From the phrase
as it stands, one may conclude that probably only the
narrower group of magnates, those immediately about
the king, rather than any large assembly assented to
the plan. This is the more likely to have been the case
1 London's exemption
Madox, vol, 1, p 773 n
Account of the custodians of the sea-ports (and of the fifteenth), omitting all
mention of the Gifteenth Madox, vol 1, pp 773–774.
8 Rot Lit Pat, vol i, pp 42-44
4 For the working out of this provision, see Abbreviatio Placitorum, p 94 (temp
John, year unknown). A jury of the men of Portsmouth gave evidence concerning
three ships leaving their port one was from Rochelle and had paid the fifteenth, the
second came from Exeter and bore a certificate that the fifteenth had been paid at
Dartmouth, and the third was from Winchelsea with wine, of which pledges had been
taken (as guarantees in the coast trade)

------
as the king was at the time waging war on the Con-
tinent.
The system was evidently regarded as a perman
nent institution. No time limit occurs in the assize;
special machinery was established; and in the ninth
year of John, London paid a fine of 200 marks to be
freed from payment.
In the creation of the special machinery for carrying
out the assize, the later and more permanent system
of customs was anticipated at many points. Col-
lectors (bailiffs) took the money, and had charge
of the machinery generally. Comptrollers kept a coun-
ter-roll and in other ways acted as a check upon the
bailiffs. Accounts were turned in to the exchequer
and coast certificates were issued, as at a later date.
Since contemporary historians passed over in silence
this experiment in customs establishment, which might
be expected to have aroused their attention, one is
inclined to question whether the system was ever
put to a test. But the summary accounts of the money
collected, enrolled in the Pipe Roll, dispel such a
,
i Madox, vol. I, p. 773 n.
1 Compotus Willelmi de Wroteham Archidiaconi de Tanton et Reginald de Corn-
hull et Willelmi de Furnell de Quindena Mercatorum per portus maris.
Newcastle
£158 5 11 Orford
£ 11 70
Jarrow
42 17 10 Ipswich
7 11 71
Cotun
0 11 11 Colchester
16 12 8
Whitby
0 4 0 Sandwich
16 0 0
Scarboro
22 04) Dover
32 6 1
Hedun
60 8 4 Rye
10 13 51
Hull
344 14 41 Winchelsea
62 2 41
York
175 8 10 Pevensey
1 1 11)
Selby
17 11 8 Seaford
12 12 2
Lincoln
657 12 2 Shoreham
20 4 9
Barton
33 11 9 Chichester
23 6 7
Ymmingham
18 15 101 Southampton
712 3 71
Grimsby
91 15 0 Exmouth
14 6 3
Boston
780 15 3 Dartmouth
3 0 0
Lynn
651 11 11 Esse
7 4 8
Yarmouth
54 15 6 Fowey
48 15 11
Norwich
8 19 10 London
836 12 10
Dunwich
5 4 9 Total
4958 7 31
MS. Pipe Roll, L. T. R., No. 50, memb. 12 b (20 July, 1203–30 Nov., 1205).

------
cus-
doubt. For the first time, we find recorded the
toms of England," 1 in reference to indirect taxes on
trade. This was not a mere phrase; it was a reality.
Nearly all England was embraced; and besides, only
goods of export or import were liable to the duty.
Coastwise trade was specifically exempt, and no
provisions existed for the collection of the fifteenth
elsewhere than on the sea-coast by the custodians of
the ports and their agents.
But the fifteenth did not wholly rise above the pre-
vailing practice of the time: it suffered to some extent
from exemptions, as did the earlier set of dues, for, as
has been seen, both denizens (Londoners) ? and aliens 3
secured freedom from paying the tax.
Since none of the details of the taking off” of
the system have come down to us, we are left to con-
jecture the causes. Two features may be pointed out:
the high rate, 64 per cent, about three times the local
rate; and the comparative freedom from local exemp-
tion. This latter was at once its strength as a system,
and its weakness in that it ran counter to the localism
of the period. It is probable that the whole system
degenerated into one of extortionate licence fees.
The maltolts of the Great Charter were doubtless the
fees for licences mentioned in the Assize of Winchester.
Consuetudines Angliae," Rot. Lit. Pat, 43 b
a Madox, vol. 1, p. 773 n.
8 " Rex, eto, Willelmo de Wrotham et socies suia etc. Mandamus vobis quod
quietis mercatores de Norweg quindena de mercandisis suis." 5 Sep, 6 John, Rot.
Lit 01, vol. 1, p 7a

------
CUSTOMS-REVENUE OF ENGLAND
147
V
CONCLUSION
During the period 1215–75, there were thus three
prominent customs features, (a) local customs, (6)
semi-national customs, and (c) a revival or continuance
of John's irregular levies upon articles of trade, a
practice systematic only in its irregularity, and in no
way leading to a customs establishment.
We are now in a position to draw up a list of the
customs according to the classification here adopted.
Schedule of customs:
I. Local (about 8th century onwards):
(a) For general use, custuma ville.
(6) For a service, e.g. pesage.
(c) For a privilege, e. g. strandage
(d) For a utility, e. g. murage.
II. Semi-national (about 1050 onwards):
(a) Lastage.
(b) Scavage.
(c) Ancient wine customs.
(d) Prise of wines.
III. National (from 1203 and 1275 onwards):
(a) Customs of King John.
(6) Customs of 1275.
(C) New Customs of 1302-03.
(d) Wool subsidy. irregular,
(e) Tonnage and poundage. Í Ed. III following:
Until 1203, we may say, all efforts to establish a
national customs system failed because of the strength
of local organization. The system was set afoot but,
where it did not die out through lack of trade or other
unfavorable condition, it was modified to fit in with
an all-pervading localism.
Between 1203 and 1347, the crown gradually did
establish a national system apart from the local system,

------
but the progress was uphill, and accompanied with many
reverses. John's attempt at erecting a complete sys-
tem was never repeated. Henry III adopted to some
extent the device of irregular pre-emptions of certain
goods for sale again. No success attended his efforts
to erect this into a system. At the same time licence
fees continued to be exacted from denizen and alien
merchants. But this too was not systematized, indeed
never was in English history, except in the reigns of
John and Elizabeth. It was only in 1275 that the
corner stone of the later and well-known system was
laid, tho the scope of the grant of that year was very
limited. One other stone was laid by the Carta Mer-
catoria in 1302-03, but only aliens were subject to the
new customs imposed. The rest of the structure was
left for Edward III to erect, and for his successors to
consolidate. The work was done only by strong hands
and piecemeal, but it was done surely; no local privi-
leges were allowed to stand.
The earlier set of customs had some chance of living
on just because they were localized. The later ones
brought on violent reactions because the local system
found no place within the new scheme. Privileged
burghers, especially those of London and the Cinque
Ports, did not like the prospects of paying indirect
taxes where formerly they had been wholly exempt.
Only in the case of the parliamentary grant of 1275
did the local hierarchies acquiesce without struggle.
The combined forces of decadent localism and nascent
constitutionalism stood out against financial innovation.
The reactions of 1215, 1258, 1297, 1303, 1311, and 1347
are landmarks in the conflict.
It is not a solecism, as Gilbert maintained, to speak
of the origin of the customs, if we mean the national
customs system. That origin is to be found in definite
a
香

------
duties imposed on foreign trade at remote dates. The
acts, assizes, and ordinances promulgating those duties
are now lost. Indeed anyone who tries to read the
letter patent calling John's system into existence will
realize by how narrow a margin that document escaped
oblivion. The different national customs constituted
definite mile-posts, the exact position of which is now
unknown, and their very existence discovered only
from their remains. Only the local customs were in
origin customary. These supplied both the name and
the example for the national customs. In the national
system the great innovations were the levying of
duties by the king in his political capacity, and the
conception of a foreign, as distinct from a local, trade,
a theory clearly laid down in 1203 and plainly put
into execution. The only surprising feature about these
early customs is just that they were national at so
early a date. That they were so in the time of John
and at the Conquest clearly shows that the idea was
conceivable and conceived. But before the dominating
particularism of the times, these customs were trans-
formed into something different, tho where they sur-
vived at all they never quite lost their identity. The
first great chapter of national customs history is a
vital part of the development from the local to the
national economy.
N. S. B. GRAS.
a
