# I

The concept of the _dominant caste_ is crucial to the understanding of rural
social life in most parts of India. Whether analysis is to be made of the
hierarchy of a multi-caste village, the settlement of a dispute at the level of
village or caste, or the pattern of Sanskritization among the several castes of
an area, a study of the locally _dominant caste_ and the kind of dominance it
enjoys is essential. Occasionally a caste is dominant in a group of neighboring
villages if not over a district or two, and in such cases, _local dominance_ is linked
with regional dominance. Such linkage also exists when the caste which is
locally dominant is different from the caste which is regionally dominant.

I stumbled on the importance of the idea of _dominant caste_ only in 1953,
after I had made two field trips to Rampura, a multi-caste village about 22
miles southeast of Mysore City in South India, and the present analysis is
based on material which was collected previously. A full understanding of the
dominance which a caste such as the Peasants (_Okkaligas_) enjoy needs a study
of the entire region over which they are dominant, and over a period of time.
I regret that I do not have the data for such an analysis. My analysis would
have been even sketchier but for the fact that in 1952 the headman of the
Peasants in the neighboring village of Kere loaned me several documents which
related to the settlement of disputes in the Kere area over a period of forty
years. These documents referred to villages in Kere _hobli_ (an administrative
division referring to a group of 20--50 villages) which is different from the hobli
to which Rampura belongs. But as Peasants are dominant in both the areas,
and as culturally the two areas are quite close to each other, I have made use
of the Kere documents in order to clarify the concept of the _dominant caste_.

I have elsewhere defined a _dominant caste_ in the following words:

>A caste may be said to be "dominant" when it preponderates numerically over the
other castes, and when it also wields preponderant economic and political power. A
large and powerful caste group can be more easily dominant if its position in the local
caste hierarchy is not too low [Srinivas 1955:18].

However, the above definition omits an element of dominance which is becoming
increasingly important in rural India, namely, the number of educated
persons in a caste and the occupations they pursue. I have called this criterion
"Western" (Srinivas 1955:26), since Western and non-traditional education
is the means by which such dominance is acquired. Villagers are aware of the
importance of this criterion. They would like their young men to be educated
and to be officers in the Government. As officers they are expected to help
their kinsfolk, castefolk and co-villagers.

 a caste enjoys all the elements of dominance, it may be said to be
dominant in a decisive way. But decisive dominance is not common; more frequently
the different elements of dominance are distributed among the castes
in a village. Thus a caste which is ritually high may be poor and lacking
strength in numbers, while a populous caste may be poor and ritually low.

The Peasants in Rampura enjoy more than one element of dominance.
Numerically they are the biggest caste with a membership of 735, while the
next biggest is the Shepherd with 235, followed by the Muslim, 179, and the
Untouchable, 125. The biggest landowners are among the Peasants, and the
Peasants together own more land than all the other castes put together. There
are also more literates and educated men among Peasants than among the
others. In 1948 there were three Peasant graduates and a single Lingayat
lawyer employed by the Government. The three most important patrons in
the village were also Peasants.[^/2] All of them owned land and loaned money.
The official Headman of the village was one of these; he was the biggest landowner,
owned two buses, and had built a few rental houses in a nearby town.
The second was Nadu Gowda,[^/3] who had kept two shops and a small rice mill.
The third was Nadu Gowda's agnatic cousin Millayya, who owned a big ricemill.

The ritual rank of Peasants is not very high. While they do rank above the
Untouchables and such low castes as the Swineherd, they are well below Brahmins
and Lingayats. In terms of _Varna_ they are Shudras, the fourth category
in the all-India hierarchy. But this does not mean much in Rampura, as there
are no "genuine" Kshatriyas or Vaishyas. (The local trading caste of Banajigas
are not accorded the status of the "twice-born" Vaishya.)

While it is true that Peasants are not ritually high, they command respect
from everyone in the village including the priestly castes of Brahmins and
Lingayats. The members of the latter castes consult one or another of the
Peasant patrons on important occasions. Even on ceremonial occasions, outside
pollution contexts, Peasants are shown respect by Lingayats and Brahmins.
Everyone is aware of the dominant position which Peasants occupy in
Rampura.

Over the last fifty years or more, the dominance of Peasants has increased
in Rampura. The available evidence indicates that in the early years of this
century Brahmins owned a considerable quantity of irrigated land in the village.
The Brahmins were the first to sense the new economic opportunities
opened to them through Western education, and they gradually moved to the
towns to enter the new white collar professions. Urban living, the cost of educating
children, and the high dowries which the new education and economic
opportunities had brought about, gradually caused the Brahmins to part with
their land. Much of this land passed to non-Brahmins, especially the Peasants,
during the years 1900--1948.

In the different parts of South India shortly after World War I there began
what may be called the Non-Brahmin Movement. At the end of World War
I, most of the important posts in the Government of Mysore were held by
Brahmins, and Non-Brahmin leaders realized that they must get Western education
if they wanted position and power. Agitation was started for the institution
of scholarships to help non-Brahmin youths study in schools and colleges,
for reservation of seats for non-Brahmins in medical and technological
colleges, and for preference in appointments to government posts. The non-Brahmin
agitation succeeded, and gradually a number of rules discriminating
against the Brahmins were evolved by the Government of Mysore. As a result
of these measures there has come into existence since the late thirties a
Western-educated non-Brahmin intelligentsia (see Srinivas 1957).

This non-Brahmin movement is relevant to the understanding of the situation
in Rampura. It was in the thirties that the leaders among Peasants in
Rampura and the neighboring villages began to think of higher education for
their sons. Contact between the Peasants in Rampura and Peasant politicians
and officials outside increased in the forties; furthermore, contact with the
towns increased generally, and a few Peasants and Lingayats frequently went
to Mysore and Bangalore to secure permits and to buy machinery and other
goods.

The Brahmins and Lingayats in Rampura provide an instance of ritual
dominance existing by itself, unaccompanied by the other forms of dominance.
Neither caste is numerically strong nor is it wealthy. But some families in
these two castes, namely, the Brahmin priest of the Rama temple and the
Lingayat priests of the Madeshwara and Basava temples, are quite well off by
village standards. The main source of income for these families is from the
land with which the temples have been endowed, while a subsidiary but not
unimportant source is the gifts in cash or kind which the devotees make to
he priests whenever they visit the temples or during harvest. The eldest son
of the Rama priest is employed in the Integral Coach Factory in Perambur
(Madras) while, as mentioned earlier, one of the Lingayat priests practices as
a lawyer in a neighboring town.

But when a caste enjoys one form of dominance, it is frequently able to
acquire the other forms as well in course of time. Thus a caste which is numerically
strong and wealthy will be able to move up in the ritual hierarchy if
it Sanskritizes its ritual and way of life, and also loudly and persistently proclaims
itself to be what it wants to be. It is hardly necessary to add that the
more forms of dominance which a caste enjoys, the easier it is for it to acquire
the rest.

What I have said above applies only to caste Hindus; Untouchability constitutes
a serious obstacle to group mobility. Untouchables in Rampura are
either landless laborers, tenants, or very small landowners. They started going
to school only in the thirties. In 1948, Untouchable leaders from outside were
going around asking Untouchables in the Rampura area to try to shake off the
symbols of Untouchability. In the neighboring village of Bihalli, for instance,
Untouchables decided to give up performing services such as removing the
carcasses of dead cattle from the houses of the higher castes, beating the tom-tom
at the festivals of village deities, and removing the leaves on which the
high castes had dined during festivals and weddings. The Bihalli Peasants
became annoyed at this and beat up the Untouchables and set fire to their
huts. A similar attempt by the Kere Untouchables was nipped in the bud by
the local Peasants.

The _dominant caste_ of Peasants in Rampura is plainly opposed to the
emancipation of Untouchables. Government efforts to improve the position of
Untouchables are often frustrated by the leaders of the locally _dominant
caste_. Thus, in 1948, the Government of Mysore sanctioned a sum of money
to enable Untouchables in Rampura to have tiled roofs instead of thatch. The
grant was administered through the Headman. The Untouchables later complained
that the Headman did not readily give the money, and then only a
small part of what he should have given. The Peasants, on the other hand, said
that the Untouchables had spent the money given to them on toddy, and that
this showed that Untouchables could not be improved.

Thus, while the Governments of India and Mysore want to abolish Untouchability,
and the Untouchables themselves want to improve their position,
the locally _dominant caste_ stands in the way; its members want the Untouchables
to supply them with cheap labor and perform degrading tasks. They
also resent the idea that Untouchables should use their wells and tanks, and
worship in their temples. They have the twin sanctions of physical force and
boycott at their disposal. It is true that the Untouchables can enforce their
rights with the aid of the Police and Law Courts, but there are many considerations
which come in the way of taking such a drastic step.

# II

The numerical strength of a caste influences the kind of relations which
it has with the other castes, and this is one of the reasons why each multi-caste
village to some extent constitutes a unique hierarchy. No two villages are
identical either in the number of castes represented or in the numerical
strength and the wealth of each resident caste. In fact, the same caste may
occupy different positions in neighboring villages. For instance, in Kere,
Fishermen are not allowed to take their wedding and other processions into
streets in which Brahmins and Peasants live, whereas in those villages in
Malavalli Taluk where Fishermen are in the majority, no such disabilities
affect them. There are other instances where the position of a caste is influenced
by considerations such as the amount of land owned by its members and
the degree to which its way of life is Sanskritized and Westernized. When the
same caste occupies different positions in different villages, the segment of the
caste which is occupying the lower position will be stimulated to move up in
the local hierarchy. Members of the minority castes in Rampura occasionally
told me with pride that in a particular village their castefolk were numerous
and wealthy. They were trying to identify themselves with people whom
they regarded as having a higher position than themselves.

Where a caste is numerically strong, its members have the assurance that
the other castes in the village will not be able to subject them to any insult or
exploitation. (The Untouchables are to some extent an exception to this.) The
capacity to "field" a number of able-bodied men for a fight and a reputation
for aggressiveness are relevant factors in determining the position of a caste
_vis-à-vis_ the other castes. Considerations of power do prevail; the system
adjusts to the situation that obtains in any single village.

I visited Kere a few times during the summer of 1952 and found that the
Brahmins there were suffering from a sense of insecurity. In the General Elections
held a few months previous to my visit, the members of the family of the
Brahmin accountant had actively canvassed for a candidate who was not residing
in Kere. This enraged the local candidate, a very powerful Peasant. The
outsider won and the defeated candidate freely expressed his dislike of Brahmins
in general and the accountant's family in particular. He even said that
he wanted the Brahmins to leave Kere. A Brahmin doctor in Kere told me
that where they are few in number, Brahmins had no future in the village. He
thought that Brahmins ought to migrate to villages and towns in which they
were represented in some strength.

Two incidents which occurred in Rampura in the summer of 1952 further
drove home to me the sense of insecurity prevalent among members of minority
castes. One was a dispute between a Potter and a Lingayat Priest in which
the latter told an influential Peasant friend that the Lingayats were in a
minority in Rampura and that it was up to the Peasants to see that they were
not humiliated. The implication was that had there been enough Lingayats,
they need not have depended upon the Peasants to secure them justice.

During the summer of 1952, a Rampura Shepherd sold all his land in the
village and his share of the ancestral house in the village. It was stated in the
sale deed that he was leaving Rampura because only a few Shepherds (actually 175)
were living there, unlike his affinal village in thich they were preponderant.
His action was unpopular, and it was widely rumored that the real reasons
for his leaving the village were his inability to get along with his brothers and
his friendliness with his wife's kin. But it is significant that those who drafted
the document regarded moving into a village where his caste was represented
in strength as a proper and sufficient reason for selling his land and house in
his natal village.

Statements are often made by members of minority castes that they have
no protection against bullying and exploitation on the part of men of the
_dominant caste_. The members of the _non-dominant castes_ may be abused,
beaten, grossly underpaid for work done, or their women required to gratify
the sexual desires of the powerful men in the _dominant caste_.

It is not unlikely that the concentration of the members of a caste into a
ward (a feature of village life all over India) adds to their sense of security.
While this practice is related to ideas of pollution and purity, this is not the
whole story. A man feels safer in the _keri_ (ward) of his caste.

A patron's following can be made to yield him economic and other benefits.
Patrons from the _dominant caste_ can secure a larger number of followers than
patrons from _non-dominant castes_. The rural patrons are "vote banks" for the
politicians, and during elections they are approached for votes. In return,
patrons expect favors --- licenses for buses and rice-mills, and seats in medical
and technological colleges for their kinsfolk. The existence of such links between
patrons and politicians establishes a continuum between rural and urban
forces, making each responsive to the other.

# III

Disputes are referred to patrons for settlement, and where there is a decisively
_dominant caste_ in a village, the biggest patrons usually come from that
caste.

The word "panchayat" has been used to include all judicial and executive
bodies in rural areas. I shall here restrict the use of the term to the official
panchayat only, i.e., the assembly of village elders constituted according to
an Act of the Provincial or State Government. It is the official panchayat
which is entitled to levy a tax on every house, house-site, and shop in the village.
The money which the official panchayat collects is to be used to provide
the village with drains and street lights, to improve the village well, tank, or
temple, and for other similar purposes. Generally, the State Government lays
down the procedure by which the official panchayat should be constituted.
There was an elected official panchayat in Rampura in 1948 constituted
under the Mysore Government's Village Panchayat Act of 1926, under
which every village was required to have a panchayat with a minimum
of twelve members, not less than half being elected. The Chairman was
usually nominated, but the Deputy Commissioner, the official in charge of a
District, was given the discretionary power to allow a village to elect the
chairman annually. He did this only when he thought a particular panchayat
deserved the honor. In 1947, Rampura was given that honor, and the immediate
result was a keen contest for the chairmanship. The Headman was nearly
unseated in the struggle. The Headman became Chairman again in 1948, but
this was because no election was held --- even though the official report stated
that an election had been held at which the Headman was elected Chairman.

In 1948 the official panchayat included leaders from every numerically significant
caste, including Muslims and Untouchables. It also included the
Brahmin village accountant. The panchayat minute book reported the holding
of a meeting once a month, but this was an exaggeration. The members even
reported one absentee at every meeting to give verisimilitude to their minutes.
During my entire stay in Rampura (in all, about 13 months), the official panchayat
met only once. The Chairman of the panchayat either made all the
decisions by himself or in consultation with his great friend, fellow-castemen,
and relative, Nadu Gowda.

The official panchayat is usually dormant and becomes active only on
certain occasions. It is the traditional and unofficial panchayat --- here called
council --- which is active in the settlement of disputes. The membership of the
council varies from village to village and from context to context. It may on
occasion include all the leaders of the numerically significant castes, or it may
include only the disputants concerned and a patron like the Headman or Nadu
Gowda. A patron usually acts on a complaint received from someone, except
when he himself is the aggrieved party. He may feel that it is not necessary
to call anyone else or he may ask the disputants to request a few other patrons
to come together. Thus when a Peasant brought a complaint before Nadu
Gowda against a Smith woman, saying that her dog had eaten his lamb, he
did not feel it necessary to invite anyone else to "sit on the bench" with him.
Village councils are informal and flexible, and there is no hard and fast rule
about who should sit on them. A great deal is left to the discretion of the patrons.

Traditional councils may be divided into caste councils and village councils,
depending on the kind of issue before the patrons. This distinction is not
absolute; there is occasional overlapping of jurisdiction. Village councils have
jurisdiction in matters such as: Who stole grass from X's field?; Who set fire
to Y's straw-rick?; and, Is Z speaking the truth when he says that P owes him
a hundred rupees and not fifty? Caste councils decide such questions as:
Should R be thrown out of caste for having sex relations with an Untouchable
woman?; and, Should J be granted a divorce from M?

A caste council usually has jurisdiction over disputes among members of
a single caste. In a dispute in which members of different castes are involved,
patrons from the concerned castes and a few patrons from the _dominant caste_
form the council. The patrons of the _dominant caste_ have jurisdiction over all
the castes living in the area. Such jurisdiction is invoked through the preexisting
bonds of patron-and-client, kinship, or friendship.

It is necessary here to comment briefly on the role of the Headman and
Nadu Gowda in the settlement of disputes in Rampura. Both are members of
the _dominant caste_, heads of large lineages, landowners, money-lenders, and
patrons. The Headman is also the holder of an hereditary government post
which gives him power and influence in the village. His joint family has considerable
prestige in the area, and his father is still mentioned for the power
which he wielded and for his many acts of impulsive generosity. In 1948 the
Headman was the biggest landowner in Rampura, and it was rumored that
he had lent more than Rs. 150,000 to people in at least 30 neighboring villages.
But the lineage of which the Headman was leader was smaller than the lineage
of which Nadu Gowda enjoyed undisputed leadership in 1948. Nadu Gowda
was also more accessible than the Headman, but he was much less wealthy;
even Millayya, a member of the same lineage, was wealthier. The Headman
and Nadu Gowda were good friends and there was a great deal of understanding
between them. Their friendship was partly responsible for Rampura's stability,
a fact which was recognized by villagers who prophesied anarchy in the
village "after the two heads fall." Between 1900 and 1920 the village was
sharply divided into a few factions, with the present Headman's father and
Nadu Gowda's father leading the two most important factions. Friendship
between the present Headman and Nadu Gowda was formed in the teeth of
their fathers' opposition.

During my stay in Rampura, I did not witness any dispute among Brahmins
and therefore cannot say to whom they would have gone for settlement.
However, I do know that during a crisis Brahmins went to one or other of the
Peasant patrons for advice and help. When a caste is decisively dominant, its
dominance extends over all the castes including castes ritually higher. The
caste-headman of Peasants in the neighboring village of Kere told me that he
once disciplined an arrogant Brahmin priest by imposing boycott on him. The
high ritual position which the Brahmin occupies does not free him from the
secular control of the _dominant caste_. This is also true with regard to the
Lingayats. During the partition of the property of one segment of the Lingayat
lineage which provides priests to the Madeshwara temple, the Headman and
his sons were consulted by the head of the joint family, and the partition
finally took place before Peasant arbitrators. In a dispute between the priests
of the Madeshwara and Basava temples, the Headman's advice was sought.
This case is interesting in showing the kind of issues on which the intervention
of the _dominant caste_ is sought. Soon after the harvest in 1948, the Basava
priest, a widower, had gone east and brought back two loose women with
him. This was criticized by everyone in the village. During the summer, at
the annual feast in honor of Basava (_Basavana para_), it is customary for the
women of the priestly Lingayat families to join together and cook for all
Lingayats. These women began cooking and were joined by the mistresses of
the Basava priest. The Lingayat women became annoyed and asked these
women to keep away, as they were loose women and no one knew their caste.
One of the Madeshwara priests later went to the Headman and requested him
to see that henceforth the two priestly lineages cooked separately on such occasions.
The Headman agreed. In 1952, in a case in which a Lingayat youth
had a liaison with a Peasant widow and also insulted a few Peasant youths, the
council consisted of the Headman, a few other Peasants and a Lingayat priest.
A fine was imposed on both the parties to the liaison and it was decreed that
the widow should soon marry. The girl went to her sister's affinal village and
got married a few months later.

Even a group like the Muslims, with customs and traditions which are quite
different from those of the Hindus, take intimate disputes among close kindred
to the Headman for settlement. In 1948 I witnessed three such disputes between
kinsfolk being taken to the Headman. It is the boast of Peasants in
Rampura that the Muslims are unable to settle a dispute among themselves
and have to take it to the Peasants. The Kere documents reveal a similar situation
in Kere hobli.

I was told more than once that an effort was usually made to settle a dispute
within the caste and to take it to the Peasants only when internal efforts
failed. It took me some time to realize that this rule was more honored in the
breach than in the observance. I witnessed several castes taking their disputes,
even intimate domestic disputes, to the Peasant patrons for settlement.

The Untouchables were the only caste to make an effort to settle their
disputes among themselves. They even succeeded in recovering from a caste
elder a fee which he failed to pay to the caste at the wedding of a daughter. I
am unable to say whether the Untouchables took care of their own disputes
because of new-found self-awareness as a group, or because they thought the
higher castes would not be interested in their affairs.

Disputes between Untouchables and high caste men are taken to Peasants
for settlement. Thus, in 1952, a dispute between a Lingayat landowner and
his Untouchable agricultural servant was taken before the Headman. Intercaste
disputes are usually taken to the Peasants for settlement.

There is a marked tendency for disputes to be settled within the village.
The local elders know the disputants intimately and they are more likely to
take a sympathetic view than are outsiders. Justice within the village is also
cheaper, swifter, and more effective. The local elders either have direct power
over the disputants themselves or have influence with those who have such
power. This is why disputes tend to be referred to local patrons even across the
caste lines. The power wielded by the local patrons is considerable, and even
outsiders seek their intervention. Thus a Shepherd from a different village requested
Nadu Gowda to use his influence with his wife's father in Rampura, to
see that she joined him.

A man who takes a dispute that does not refer to caste matters outside the
village is guilty of slighting the local patrons. His action is, in effect, a declaration
of "no confidence" in them, and he will soon be made to realize that he
has incurred their wrath. Nemesis is swift in an Indian village where people
are bound to each other by a multitude of ties. The outside elders, on their
part, would not like to offend local elders. They know full well the power
wielded by the local elders, who would be able to withhold true evidence and
even produce false evidence, if annoyed. Their help would be necessary in arranging
a match, in securing a loan, and in a dozen other ways.

In some cases, however, the local elders may not be likely to intervene.
They may think that the particular question has to be decided by the elders of
the caste concerned and not by themselves. In the summer of 1946, a caste
dispute among Washermen from several villages in Mandya and Mysore Districts
was settled in Rampura. None of the important Peasant patrons attended
the meeting. Sometimes the Peasant patrons may be indifferent because
none of the disputants is a client or a kinsman. When a client is involved
in a dispute, the patron steps in either because he must, or because the client
urges him to do so. Thus Nadu Gowda was actively advising a Shepherd client
who was making efforts to get his daughter's marriage dissolved. The husband
was living in Sathnur and the case had gone up before the Shepherds in that
village.

Where the local patrons have power, and factions are not deep, disputes
go before them for settlement. If they are taken to a government court or to
elders living outside the village, it means that the matter is beyond the local
patrons. Thus in Rampura, though people submitted their disputes to one or
other of the Peasant patrons, there were a few who were known for wanting to
take every dispute to the official courts. These people were not respected in the
village. The Rampura patrons were rich and influential and it was their boast
that their disputes were always settled locally. In this respect Rampura was
unlike some neighboring villages.

While there is usually a tendency to settle a dispute within the village,
there is "leap frogging" when the caste which is dominant in the higher village
is the same as the one which is dominant in the lower village. Thus, if Peasants
are dominant in both the higher and lower villages, the Peasants living in the
lower village show a tendency to take every dispute, including trivial ones, to
Peasant patrons in the higher village. This occurs even though it is the policy
of the council of the higher village to support the authority of caste and village
councils within its jurisdiction.

# IV

A brief description of the structure of village and caste councils is necessary
here. This is complicated, as a part of the picture has to be reconstructed from
the little that is now open to observation. Elderly villagers are frequently
heard to say that things have changed a great deal and that many of the customs
and conventions which were being observed even 20 or 30 years ago are
being dropped nowadays. The Kere documents help a little in reconstructing
the structure as it was a few decades ago, but it is not correct to argue that what
was true of Kere was true of all hoblis. Moreover, elderly informants are fond
of making neat statements about the social organization of their caste and
area, and it is difficult to fit them to the behavior seen today. Thus, for instance,
a Potter will mention that at a wedding ceremony in his caste, 70 sets
of betel leaves and arecanuts are kept apart for distribution to representatives
from the 70 villages forming part of Potter's caste circle. Another Potter will
say that 48 or 60 sets ought to be kept and not 70; neither is able to list the
villages. If one goes to a Potter wedding, one does not see the specified number
of sets of betel leaves and arecanuts kept apart. One is told that the custom
has been discontinued only in the last four or five years. The data are sometimes
more reliable, especially when they relate to disputes which actually
occurred and were witnessed by informants. With these strictures, I will endeavor
to reconstruct the organization of village and caste councils.

The village council is the lowest unit in the settlement of disputes. In this
connection it is necessary to define what is meant by a village. Where villages
are nucleated it is not difficult to identify and distinguish a village, but every
nucleated settlement is not regarded as a village by the government. Thus
Kere consists of three distinct nucleated settlements, one of which is Kere
proper; the other two, which have distinct names, are called _dākhale grāmagalu_
or "satellite villages." For official purposes, the two satellite villages are one
with Kere, and the hereditary Kere officials look after all the three settlements.
But for social and religious purposes, Kere is three separate villages. A
small village is occasionally tacked onto a nearby larger one for reasons of administrative
economy. In the settlement of disputes, however, it is the social
and religious unit which is important, not the administrative unit.

For purposes of administration again, villages are grouped into hoblis,
hoblis into taluks or sub-taluks, and taluks into districts, and finally, districts
into the State of Mysore. Rampura is not only socially but also administratively
a village, and it lies in Hogur hobli, Sangama Taluk, Mysore District.
(Until August, 1938, Mandya and Mysore formed a single District.)

The division into hoblis is an old division, and a hobli may contain from
20 to 50 villages. This division corresponded to some extent with the social
organization. Thus the council of the capital (_kasba_) of the hobli was regarded
as a _kattemane_ or "house of law." A kattemane is a place where disputes are
settled. The headman of the kattemane is called _Nadu Gowda_, and in the
Rampura area he is usually from the _dominant caste_ of Peasants. The area
over which a kattemane has jurisdiction (identical with a hobli) is called
_Mahanadu_ (big country), and in letters, the headman of the kattemane is
addressed as Chief of the Mahanadu (_Mahanadu Gowda_). It may be mentioned
here that a basic dichotomy existed between the agricultural castes
which constituted _Nadu_, and the artisan and trading castes which constituted
_Desha_. (These castes are represented on the brass ladle carried by the _kulavadi_,
the Untouchable servant of the Hindu castes.) The agricultural castes are entitled
to the honorific suffix of _Gowda_ and the trading and artisan castes to
_Shetti_. The Chief of the Shetti group is usually a leading trader in the hobli-capital
and is called _Desha Shetti_. The Chief of the Nadu group of castes and
the Desha Shetti are both respected figures, and sets of betel leaves and
arecanuts are set apart for them at any wedding.

Peasants are dominant in Kere, and more than 50 years ago, they shared
this dominance with Brahmins. But the Brahmins do not seem to have played
a very prominent part in the settlement of disputes. The Kere documents show
that the council of Peasants wielded effective power not only in Kere village
but over the entire hobli. I am not able to say what the situation was like in
Hogur, the hobli to which Rampura belongs, but Rampura itself had powerful
Peasant leaders, as we have seen.

A variety of disputes were referred to the council of Peasant elders in Kere.
One document referred to the punishment of a Fisherman who falsely alleged
that his father's classificatory younger brother's wife, i.e., his classificatory
mother, was his mistress. If the allegation was true, both were guilty of incest.
The Peasant elders of Kere were angered by the false allegation and felt much
sympathy for the wronged woman; they imposed two fines on the man, one of
40 rupees to be paid to the Peasant council, and another of 15 rupees to be
paid to the Fisherman council. The Peasant caste council threatened the culprit
with expulsion from his own Fisherman caste if he repeated the allegation.
This incident shows the extraordinary power possessed by the council of the
_dominant caste_, being able even to threaten a member of a different caste with
outcasting.

In another document the Peasant elders defined the conditions under
which a Muslim priest resident in Ganjam village was to serve the Muslims of
Kere. He was asked to recognize three Muslims in Kere as leaders of the local
Muslims, and to serve only those whom these three approved, but told that if
he were dissatisfied with the Muslim leaders, he was to take his complaint to
the Peasant leaders. In the same document, the Muslims in Kere and another
village agreed to obey the three Muslim leaders, and added that, in case of
dissatisfaction with the leaders' decisions, they would appeal to the Peasant
elders in Kere.

A year after this document was signed, Kere Muslims informed the Peasant
elders that they would bring them their disputes, as some had refused to obey
the Muslim leaders. This highlights a feature of rural social organization in this
area: the council of the _dominant caste_ tries to create a structure of authority
within each group it has to deal with, though its efforts frequently fail. In one
case the Peasant headman of a village in Kere hobli complained to the Kere
council that his villagers did not respect him at all, but took every trivial
dispute to the elders in Kere. He requested the elders to support his authority
in the village. When the caste which is dominant in a village is also dominant
in the hobli-capital, the many ties between the two groups seem to militate
against settling disputes locally.

The word kattemane evokes respect in the minds of Peasants in this area.
All castes resident in a hobli-capital claim that they have kattemane status,
Thus Oilmen, Fishermen, and Muslims resident in Hogur claim that their
councils are higher than their respective caste councils in the other villages of
the hobli. An Oilman from Hogur, at a wedding in his caste in any other village
in his hobli, demands that he be given a set of betel leaves and arecanuts
(_veelya_) before any other Oilman from that hobli , and creates a furore if he
is not given such priority.

Ceremonial precedence is a different matter from referring village disputes
to the council of the particular caste in the hobli-capital. If the particular
caste is numerically strong and wealthy in the hobli-capital, disputes may be
taken to its council. If one or more elders are also well-known for their wisdom
and skill in settling disputes, more people use their caste council. In the course
of a generation or two, such a place is likely to acquire renown for settling
disputes. I am inclined to think that the reputation of the Peasant councils in
villages such as Keragodu and Nelamane was built up in this way. It is also
probable that over a period of time the reputation of a council rises and falls,
though people seem to regard it as immutable.

The council of the hobli-capital is sensitive about the position it enjoys. At
the annual festival of Madeshwara in Gudi in 1947, a fight occurred between
Kere and Bihalli, and in the month of February 1948 the elders of Bihalli began
working toward a settlement. They approached the Peasant elders of
Hogur and Rampura, and it was decided to call a meeting of the elders of Kere,
Bihalli, Hogur, and Rampura on a particular day. The Kere elders were informed
accordingly, but no one from Kere turned up. Lame excuses were
given for their nonappearance, but everyone knew that the real reason was
that Kere people felt they were being ordered about by Hogur. On the next
date that was decided, the Hogur elders failed to turn up. They wanted to pay
Kere leaders tit for tat. The pride of both villages having been satisfied, everyone
attended on the third day and the dispute was settled.

In actual discussions with villagers, they frequently mentioned a particular
village as constituting the highest council (_andalu gadi_) for a particular
caste. Thus Peasants stated that the Peasant council in Nelamane was their
highest court, while Shepherds mentioned Chennapatna, Basketmakers designated
Malavalli, and Potters, Keragodu. Informants always mentioned the
existence of documents and copper-plate deeds which defined the rights and
privileges of their caste. Of course, no one had seen those documents, but all
had heard about their existence.

It seems likely that a particular caste dominant in a village gradually acquired
a reputation for settling disputes; it is also probable that the elders at
one time sought and obtained the support of the local chieftain, or ruler or the
head of a monastery for their decisions. When the village is a hobli-capital, it
is easier for it to establish and enhance such authority.

Evidence that the reputation of a council was not constant over a period
of time is found on occasions when there is an open challenge to a dominant
position. Thus, several years ago, Potters from Mysore City claimed precedence
over Potters from Keragodu. The former argued that they represented
the place where H. H. the Maharajah of Mysore lived, the capital of the
State, and as such they had to be given priority over Keragodu. The Keragodu
Potters replied that priority to Seringapatam had not been conceded when Hyder
Ali and Tippu Sultan were ruling there (in the 18th century), and there
was no reason why they should give precedence to Mysore now. Thereupon
Mysore Potters refused to attend weddings in Keragodu area. However, the
Mysoreans' claim was conceded in Tagadur area in the east. Refusal to acknowledge
changes in relative status is the source of much confusion in regard
to the organization of councils. The great increase in communications between
members of the same caste living in different areas makes for more debate
regarding mutual position, and there is yet another complicating factor: some
young men in every caste regard all this as antiquated.

# V

As already mentioned, the patron-client tie is of crucial importance in the
settlement of disputes. It is so powerful that disputes are always referred upward
from clients to patrons.[^/4] As the patrons and clients frequently belong to
different castes, there is no strong sentiment that a dispute should be settled
within the caste. Disputes are more easily settled locally if the patrons are
powerful and come from a caste which is decisively dominant. Where a caste
is dominant in a group of neighboring villages, the influence of a patron extends
far beyond his own village. Where a village is split into factions, each faction
administers justice within it, and interfactional relations resemble international
relations.

In Rampura the biggest and most important patrons are from the Peasant
caste, and the patrons from the other high castes are aware of the power
wielded by the Peasant patrons.

In 1948, Rampura was not factionalized, though a few isolated groups disliked
the Headman and everyone associated with him. They were not numerous
enough to challenge his authority and that of Nadu Gowda. Elderly villagers
frequently remarked that Rampura was more prosperous and unified
than in the first two decades of this century, when even the large landowners
were indebted to money-lenders in Mysore and Tadagavadi, and when, during
the harvest, grain was measured out to the creditors as interest on these loans.
That earlier period was characterized by deep factionalism; the several patrons
were at loggerheads with each other. Elderly informants asserted that the villagers
went more to the law courts then than in the later period. Particularly
Narase Gowda, a faction leader, went to the law courts a great deal and
acquired an intimate knowledge of law and legal procedure which he put to
excellent use harassing his enemies, including the present Headman's father.
The two often supported rival candidates in law suits. Elderly villagers say
that the factions in the village began to disappear sometime after the end of
World War I when one of the leading villagers was involved in a murder case
and the village closed ranks and rallied behind the suspected man.

I have heard it said in Rampura that respectable people ought not to frequent
the law courts. In 1948 the few who did so were unpopular and had a
reputation for being very unscrupulous. This does not mean that a respectable
man should never go to a law court, but that he should go only after he has
exhausted all other remedies. It is generally felt that it is better to settle a
dispute in the village than take it to a government court. When in a moralizing
mood, villagers are able to reel off the names of those who liquidated substantial
fortunes in taking disputes from one law court to another. It may be mentioned
that a good deal of what goes on in a law court does not make sense to
villagers; they know that a clever lawyer has to be hired, and that when a man
loses in a lower court he can appeal to a higher. When a man loses in a government
law court it does not mean that he has done wrong or that he loses face
with his fellow villagers, but only that his lawyer is not clever enough or that
he is not lucky. Villagers know that a man who has a right to a thing may lose
it in a law court and the man who has no right may win it. This contrasts with
the decisions of a village court, which have an ethical connotation. For instance,
I found in the village panchayat book a note to the effect that a Smith
had been fined one pie (1/192 of a rupee). I asked some people about the
meaning of fining an absurd sum like a pie. They explained to me that it was
levied only on a man who was found to be a persistent wrong-doer over trifles.
The fine meant that an eye had always to be kept on the wrong-doer. The
more serious punishments such as imposing a heavy fine, temporary boycott,
and outcasting also have an ethical implication. I do not mean to imply here
that the decisions of village councils are always right and that village arbitrators
are incorruptible, but only that the decisions have a moral implication
which the decisions of the government civil courts usually lack.

I have mentioned earlier that the patrons of the _dominant caste_ tend to
support, if not to create, local structures of authority. In consonance with this
principle, they apply to the disputants the customs and rules which the latter
recognize as binding, even when they are different from the customs and rules
which are binding on the _dominant caste_. This respect for the moral code of
every caste is one of the reasons why the decisions of the council of the _dominant
caste_ still continue to be respected. It is indeed a matter of surprise that
village councils continue to function in spite of more than 100 years of British
law administered through the powerful official law courts. The Kere documents
included two cases which had been pending before the Government law
courts but which had subsequently been withdrawn to be submitted to the
council of the _dominant caste_ in Kere.

# SUMMARY

A study of the locally _dominant caste_ and the kind of dominance it enjoys,
is essential to the understanding of rural society in India. Numerical strength,
economic and political power, ritual status, and Western education and occupations,
are the most important elements of dominance. Usually the different
elements of dominance are distributed among different castes in a village.
When a caste enjoys all or most of the elements of dominance, it may be said
to have decisive dominance.

The Peasants in Rampura enjoy decisive dominance. They command respect
not only from several lower castes, but also from the priestly castes,
Brahmins and Lingayats, who have a higher ritual rank but who are not free
from the secular control of the _dominant caste_.

The numerical strength of a caste influences its relations with the other
castes. The capacity to muster a number of able-bodied men for a fight, and
reputation for aggressiveness, are relevant factors. Considerations of power do
prevail. The members of the _non-dominant castes_ may be abused, beaten,
grossly underpaid, or their women required to gratify the sexual desires of the
powerful men in the _dominant caste_. The patrons from the _dominant caste_ are
"vote banks" for the politicians.

The _dominant caste_ plays a very important role in the settlement of disputes,
which are settled by the traditional village and caste councils and not
by the modern statutory panchayats. A caste council usually has jurisdiction
over only the members of a single caste, but the _dominant caste_ has jurisdiction
over all the castes living in a village. The leaders of the _dominant caste_
not only settle disputes between members of different castes but are also frequently
approached by _non-dominant castes_ for the settlement of their internal,
even domestic, disputes. In the settlement of disputes, the patron-client
tie is extremely important.

A feature of the administrative system of Mysore, handed down from preBritish
days, is the grouping of villages into hoblis. The council of the _dominant
caste_ in the hobli-capital is called a kattemane (house of law), and it settles
disputes not only occurring within the capital, but also entertains appeals
from councils of every village in the hobli. It normally tries to uphold the authority
of local elders. The working of caste and village councils and their relation
to the council of the hobli-capital is extremely complicated and perhaps
varies from hobli to hobli. The study of the working of these councils is essential
to the understanding of the _dominant caste_.

[^/2]: For an elaboration of the concept of patron, see my 1955 essay.

[^/3]: Here Nadu Gowda is the name of a Peasant; it is usually the name of the hereditary headman
of the Peasant caste in a hobli-capital.

[^/4]: This tendency is probably a universal feature of rural India. See, for example, Gough.

# REFERENCES CITED

::: {#refs}

\ 

**GOUGH, KATHLEEN**

\ 

1955 The social structure of a Tanjore village. _In_ Village India, McKim Marriott ed.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

\ 

**M. N. SRINIVAS**

\ 

1955 The social system of a Mysore Village. _In_ Villiage India, McKim Marriott ed.
Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

\ 

1957 Caste in Modern India. _The Journal of Asian Studies_ 4:529--48.

:::
