# The Effect of Too much Substantive Law

The function of substantive law as the embodiment of the great ideals of
an independent judiciary has today become confused by an attempt to
apply it in detail to too many cases. Legal scholars have felt it their
peculiar duty to clarify the situation and to combat the skeptical
attitude toward the decisions of courts for which that confusion was
responsible. The American Law Institute is only part of this continuing
effort. Law reviews have been filled with attempts to clarify particular
fields. The usual method of attack, however, has been based on the
assumption that the confusion was the fault of an untutored judiciary
who had failed to reason and reconcile with that nicety which the
occasion required. Therefore, if the existing cases are only thoroughly
sifted, certain fundamental principles will finally appear which
everyone must recognize to be the principles on which appellate courts
and trial courts must operate until relieved by the legislature. The
discovery of these principles depends on the examination of what
appellate courts have said, without any particular regard to its
utility. The reason utility can not be a test is that substantive law
governs society outside the courts, and can only be changed by
legislative enactment (except, of course, that minor gaps can be filled
or new principles discovered).

The effect of this notion has been to make our system of judicial logic
grow like a snowball. Since so many of our rules are treated with the
attitude of substantive law, it has been difficult to talk about the
problems involved. An ordinary rule can be treated in the light of its
purpose and bent to meet a practical situation. A principle of
substantive law can also be modified, but not for practical
considerations. A greater principle must always be discovered. It is
inevitable therefore that if many of our problems are treated from the
point of view of substantive law, the bulk and complexity of the
principles of that science should increase beyond a point where any
artificial attempt to simplify by restatement is futile.

The only method of preventing the confusion of doctrines and precedents
is to treat them as ideals and general directions and to insulate them
from the cases which distort them into so many complicated and difficult
shapes. This seems paradoxical, yet it is based on the obvious
proposition that out of ten selected cases a legal scholar can build a
more coherent set of principles than he can out of ten thousand chosen
at random. We may illustrate it by calling attention to the success of
the English system. Here we find no skeptics undermining its prestige.
The supposed superiority of the English judges is heralded with great
humility wherever American lawyers gather. This does not mean that the
English judges are really superior, but that the conception of
substantive law is giving them a prestige which removes them from
individual criticism.

What has happened in England in the years following the Judicature Act
is not the sudden substitution of enlightened judges for bigoted ones,
but the insulation of the science of substantive law from the practical
problem of litigation. Instead of rigidly applying the substantive-law
doctrines through the principle of _stare decisis_, as many imagine, the
English have been devising practical escapes which separate principles
of substantive law from the actual cases which confuse them. This has
been done by transferring power to the trial courts and making it
difficult for appellate courts to make a written application of
doctrines to any case not fought with unusual determination and
disregard of expense. Thus substantive law exists at the top of the very
practical English system as an ideal exposition of a way of thought and
expression.

The ways in which this has been accomplished are interesting. First,
that vast mass of principles which are treated in America from a
substantive law point of view under the name of pleading and the various
steps before trial, are removed from the logical interpretation of
appellate courts by the simple device of interposing a master between
the litigant and the judge.[^26] In criminal cases the complicated
substantive science loses its importance because the court of criminal
appeal may treat cases individually and even increase the penalty,
instead of sitting solely as a court of error.[^27] Third, the heavy
imposition of costs makes appeal difficult. The attorney who thinks that
a principle of substantive law is wrongly applied by a lower court must
gamble very heavily on his judgment if he wants it reviewed.[^28]
Finally, only selected cases are collected in the reports which make up
the libraries of available citation. Six hundred and ninety-seven
volumes make up the relevant material for legal argument.[^29] We are
left to guess how many inconvenient cases from the point of view of
symmetry are buried under this important procedural device.[^30] What
is left after all these selective processes constitutes the "substantive
law." Of course the cases are more easily reconciled because one hundred
cases can be reconciled in a much less complicated way than a thousand.
Thus, in England substantive law performs its function as a
philosophical guide divorced from actual cases. Power is transferred to
trial courts, and to judges who are not dignified by that peculiar name.
Judicial realism is dormant as realism always is when a creed is
fulfilling its function.[^31] The very practical matters which
determine litigation are taken care of in a practical way. Criticism of
decisions in the way American decisions are criticised in our law
reviews, does not exist.

It is this ability of the English to keep an ideal from too close
contact with reality which explains the prestige which they are able to
throw around their institutions. There is little positive evidence that
results in English courts are better than in ours, if we take into
consideration the intricate tasks which our courts are facing. The
evidence is only of a dignified process where the dividing line between
procedure and substantive law is so placed that it increases the area of
procedure and simplifies the judicial expression of principle.

In France the code stands as the ultimate symbol of substantive law. The
work of commentators who are more interested in principles than in
reconciling all the cases is given great weight. And finally, cases
which make these principles stand out are selected as precedents. The
gap between the code and its principles and the actual results is a
matter concealed in the double trial afforded by the lower courts, which
provides opportunity to treat the practical problems of litigation in a
practical way. Whatever the demerits of the French judicial system, at
least it has not become verbally cumbersome.

In this country the Supreme Court of the United States, in dealing with
constitutional problems, has, in recent years, been rapidly escaping
from the position of the humble instrument of constitutional doctrine,
and is being studied and recognized as a great judicial institution.
This has been accomplished by a change of attitude which permits us to
study the Court, operating through the language of the constitution,
instead of the constitution, with the Court appearing as an incidental
agency of enforcement. The skepticism of Mr. Justice Holmes and Mr.
Justice Brandeis, which recognizes, on the one hand, that doctrines do
not govern society, and, on the other, that they can be used wisely and
skilfully in governing the Court, is the kind of skepticism which
creates great institutions. In this they have been aided by a few
interpreters who have broken down the attitude which created the old
conventional course in constitutional law of fifteen years ago. As
peculiarly effective in accomplishing this I may cite Frankfurter and
Powell of Harvard, and Hamilton of Yale. Frankfurter by centering his
attention first on the problem to be solved,[^32] and then on the
Supreme Court as an institution, as in _The Business of the Supreme
Court_[^33] --- Powell by his penetrating wit, which is never used
merely for the purpose of being funny, and which illuminates like
flashes of lightning, as in his "An Imaginary Judicial Opinion"[^34]
--- and Hamilton, with his beautifully phrased constructive philosophy
in which the utility and future possibilities of the formulae of
constitutional law in the hands of an enlightened judge are
demonstrated, as in his "The Jurist's Art"[^35] --- have made the
Supreme Court stand out as a living instrument of government. Never has
the prestige of that Court been higher. No one is worrying about
restating constitutional law so that it will be simpler and easier for
that Court to apply it. These formulae seemed to have slipped into their
proper place, as necessary tools with which the Court must work, which
limit its activities, and aid in the expression of the attitude and
ideals which it brings to the solution of governmental problems. And the
confusion incident to a written expression of these doctrines in too
many cases is prevented by a discretionary appeal.

That the bundles of concepts and logical systems found in such fields as
contracts or torts, are not different, except in the area of their
application, from the formulae of constitutional law, does not seem to
be so clearly recognized.[^36] The constant attempt is to use them so
that they will control, not the processes of the court, but society in
general. They are being continually rephrased in various ways, so that
their fundamental elements can become more and more detailed and
certain. The English trick of isolating them from the general run of
litigation so that the effect of the attitude which they induce and the
general directions which they furnish will not be lost, is not realized.
An illustration may be useful here. If A tells B to report an accident,
giving only the facts and omitting so far as possible his conclusions,
this general direction will unquestionably affect the type of report.
But if A and B insist on writing books about the differences between
facts and conclusions examining in detail all the reports which have
been handed in for the past ten years, the direction will become
unintelligible. The rule will fail to function if it is analyzed in
every case. It will also fail to function if everything which has been
said about the difference between facts and conclusions, and not
expressly repudiated since the time of Lord Coke, must be preserved and
made relevant in the discussion of the report which B makes.[^37]
