# Procedure as an Escape from Substantive Law


Our judicial system, objectively examined, seems to be founded on so
many imponderable psychological factors that it can never be molded by a
direct attack upon its ideals without impairing its prestige. On the
other hand, its logical machinery is so elastic that it is capable of
tremendous changes if we understand the function which that logical
machinery performs. And because of the efforts of such men as Clark,
Pound, and Sunderland to make procedure a practical thing, followed by
the missionary propaganda found in such a periodical as the Journal of
the American Judicature Society, we find that today, by calling a body
of doctrine procedure, we can take an entirely different attitude toward
it from that which we take where we call it substantive law. Anyone can
say that procedure is not fundamental, that it has only to do with the
legal process, that it does not govern the outside world, that it always
needs reform, and finally that the reform may be accomplished by a
consideration of the problem involved, not by analyzing the fundamental
principles involved in doctrine.

The distinction between procedure and substantive law is one of the most
interesting consequences of our attitude toward an independent
judiciary. Substantive law is sacred and fundamental. It represents the
experience of the ages. On it is based the freedom of the individual. It
never needs reform because its fundamental verities can always be
discovered by logical analysis. Procedure, on the other hand, is
entirely practical. It always needs, not logic, but change in the light
of practical details. It is based on the experience of the ages also,
but age with it is senility, not wisdom. Yet, in spite of these
fundamental differences, no one has ever been able to formulate any test
which will distinguish between procedure and substantive law in any
particular case. Substantive law remains the "law" which we enforce,
procedure the practical rules by which we enforce it. We therefore
always "restate" substantive law in the light of its principles, and
"reform" procedure in the light of its practical problems.

The distinction is most useful in the judicial system, once we realize
that the difference is only in attitude, that any doctrine may be
treated as procedure and the problem discussed, or as substantive law
and the principle stated. The difference between procedure and
substantive law is a movable dividing line which may be placed wherever
an objective examination of our judicial institutions indicates is
necessary. Illustrations of this may be multiplied indefinitely. We will
confine ourselves to two. The problem of the distribution of legal
business between states may be considered from the substantive-law angle
under the topics of conflicts of laws, collateral attack, process,
presumptions in favor of a court of general jurisdiction, the
distinction between lack of jurisdiction and error in exercising it, the
distinction between domicil and mere residence, the concept of doing
business, express and implied consent to be sued, conceptions of local
and transitory actions, and so on indefinitely. Or it may be considered
from the procedural angle as a practical problem of determining the
place of trial in civil actions, as Mr. Roger Foster does in two
illuminating articles.[^38] From such a point of view the concepts and
theories disappear as irrelevant, without even doing violence to the
rule of _stare decisis_. It becomes apparent that if the court will only
talk about the problem it can easily escape the consequences of a
philosophy which is quite unfitted for its solution. Or if it can not,
in any given instance, we will at least know how to draft an act which
will treat the problem procedurally. Another example is found in the
method by which the law of sales determines where the loss of goods
destroyed by fire should fall as between buyer and seller. Obviously
what the doctrine is doing is determining in what cases the
determination of liability shall be left to a jury. Treated
substantively we find that it depends on whether "title" passed, which
in turn depends on the "intent" of the parties, which in turn may depend
on certain presumptions, from which the jury must find intent. The jury
is never permitted to find the real fact --- that the parties had no
actual intent at the time because they were thinking neither of "title"
nor of loss by fire. Treated procedurally we would talk not of intent
but of the distribution of power between the court and jury. Probably
the sales question is better solved by the apparent uniformity of the
doctrine where no better practical solution is offered,[^39] and
probably the place of trial can be better solved by a procedural
treatment because the doctrine includes so many dissimilar
things.[^40] We use the illustrations merely to show that there is no
doctrine of _stare decisis_, as opposed to _stare dictum_, which prevents us
from considering the practical utility of treating any problem from a
procedural point of view. Substantive law is canonized procedure.
Procedure is unfrocked substantive law.

In view of these existing legal attitudes, emphasis on the procedural
aspects, rather than on the underlying principles of any legal doctrine
can afford an effective method for immediately relieving courts and
attorneys of much of the burden arising from the myriad precedents in
this country. The law of negligence, for example, deals for the most
part with (1) the distribution of power between trial courts and juries
and (2) the ritual by which the jury is put in the proper frame of mind
to determine liability. The substantive-law solution is in part a
textbook, written through the medium of instructions, against a
background of conflicting results which certainly are not determined by
those instructions. Our formulae concerning non-prejudicial error, and
the jury's power over questions of "fact" are sufficiently loose that
we may, if we wish, consider instructions in the light of their
purpose,[^41] and remove the cases which deal with them from cases
dealing with the question whether the jury is to be permitted to pass on
the question at all. Thus we may treat any part of our substantive law
from a procedural point of view. The selection need not be based on
history but on objective utility.

In determining the utility of doctrine it is important to recognize that
the function of the legal scholar as critic or reformer is different
from that of the judge writing an opinion. The former may state his
position from the point of view of an objective examination of the court
as an institution. The latter must deal with doctrines as realities. The
penalty of uncompromising realism on the part of the judge is the
disappearance of courts as we now know them. The penalty of the belief
that the legal scholar need only state fundamental principles in a
judicial way is that uncompromising realists will flourish. The
imponderable psychological factors involved in the necessity that
critics and judges adopt different standards of values in their
respective rôles may be expressed in an analogy.

The operation of our judicial institutions may be likened to the
presentation of a play. The judges are the actors on the stage moving
the audience with great lines, impressively delivered. To some in the
audience the lines carry moral lessons, inspirational ideals, and
definite directions as to how they should act in situations similar to
the one presented. To others the lines have the moving effect of great
art. Every audience will contain both types, and every person in the
audience will swing backward and forward between these two points of
view. The litigant who has sponsored the performance has been ushered
out because he was disturbing the audience (just as the formulation of
the principles of substantive law is constantly aimed at getting rid of
the litigant by making the law so certain that litigation will be
unnecessary, or telling him to resort to arbitration, or the action of a
commission). Unquestionably the play is exercising a stabilizing
influence on the manners and customs of the community.

Suppose into this very satisfactory situation we introduce a realist who
insists on interrupting the actors in their most impressive speeches by
telling the audience that it is only a theatrical performance. Or
suppose that one of the actors bends over the footlights in an aside to
explain that he is only an actor in a play. Obviously the effect of the
play is destroyed.

Suppose, on the other hand, that the directors of the play are composed
of fundamentalists who are firmly convinced of the truth and objective
importance of the great lines of all the plays in the past. Because of
that belief they insist that the principle actor repeat Hamlet's
soliloquy in "Desire Under the Elms." Such a restatement would destroy
the play as effectively as the interruptions of the realists, and might
even make the play so dull that the audience would prefer to listen to
the realist rather than the actors. The only worthwhile critic or
director would be the one who considered the utility of any line to
produce the effect at which he consciously aimed within the limits of
the setting in which it was to be delivered.

Such a figure of speech is significant, not in depicting absolute truth
but in picturing what the writer considers to be a useful attitude in
America today. The details of legal philosophy are not so significant as
the general attitudes or approaches to problems which they induce. There
is no absolutely true approach because "in the house of jurisprudence
there are many mansions."[^42] The happy phrase "relativist--realist
jurisprudence"[^43] recently coined by Dean Pound is a short way of
saying that an objective examination of courts may not be so necessary
in England where appellate courts confine their observations to a few
hundred volumes as it is in America when we seek to prevent the
confusion of a yearly output of twenty-five thousand printed opinions.
We have a very practical problem before us, to make our way of judicial
expression more intelligible, and our judicial principles and ideals
more effective. The writer thinks that it can only be solved by
determining what problems may be removed from the rigid impersonal
atmosphere of substantive law and brought down into the practical
atmosphere of procedure. This is not a denial of the necessity of a
rigid philosophy of substantive law in our judicial system. It is simply
an attempt to point out that the legal scholar or critic, by centering
his attention on the judicial institution in connection with the
problems with which it is confronted, can determine which of these
problems should be treated with the attitude of substantive law, and
which with the attitude of "procedure."[^44] In that way rather than
in the assumption that historical categories can only be changed by
legislatures, which do not and can not understand them, lies the way to
the clarification of our judicial expression. Without an objective
examination of the judicial institution itself, we are likely to be
trapped by our old phrases, and to feel that we must continue to use
them long after this utility has disappeared.
