_Colin Gonsalves' article "The
Bhopal Catastrophe: Politics,
Conspiracy and Betrayal"
(EPW, 26 June 2010) is neither an
accurate narrative of the law nor
of the Supreme Court's treatment
of the Bhopal Gas Disaster case.
This note attempts to set the
record straight._

\ 

The 7 June 2010 conviction and sentencing
of seven accused, in the
Bhopal Gas Disaster, has revived
the indignation and protest that each judicial
episode has generated among the survivors
and their supporters. The history of
the cases, as dealt with by the Supreme
Court is important for understanding
what has happened. Among the significant
judicial moments is the 14 (or) 15 February
1989 settlement order[^/1] that attempted
to entomb the cases against the Union
Carbide Corporation (UCC), Union Carbide
India Ltd (UCIL), and UC Eastern and officers
and functionaries of these companies.
On 4 May 1989, following protests about
the way the Court had brought the cases
to a close, the paltry sum for which the
cases were settled and the quashing of
criminal cases, the Court resorted to a
most unusual manoeuvre of delivering an
order explaining its reasons for the settlement
order.[^/2] On 22 December 1989, a
challenge to the Bhopal Claims Act 1985
that had been pending from before the
settlement order was answered, pragmatically
upholding the government's taking
over of the litigation from the victims.[^/3]
The review petitions were decided in
1991, in which the criminal cases were
revived while the rest of the settlement
order was preserved.[^/4] In 1996, on an
appeal by the Indian accused, judgment
was delivered diluting the criminal
charges against the accused --- from a
graver culpable homicide not amounting
to murder to a diluted charge of rash and
negligent act.[^/5] The 7 June judgment is
part of the continuum with these cases.
The settlement order of February 1989
has been a brooding presence in all
judicial proceedings that have followed,
adding complexity to each judicial
engagement with the disaster. The law
has hardly developed, and so, to the
extent that the Bhopal cases provide
precedent, they remain in place, and will
have to be contested and worked on.

In this process, clarity about the law,
and facts, is a prerequisite. The article by
Colin Gonsalves, senior advocate, "The
Bhopal Catastrophe: Politics, Conspiracy
and Betrayal", EPW, 26 June 2010, pp. 68--75
unfortunately is not an accurate narrative
of the law, or of the Court's treatment of
the case. One significant problem with
Gonsalves' article is that he confuses the
argument of the victims with the decision
of the Court. This is a serious error, especially
considering that the Court has been
challenged time and again by the victims,
and that, from the settlement order to the 1996
decision to dilute the criminal
charges against the corporate accused,
the victims have found themselves let
down by the Court.

Gonsalves, for instance, refers to what
he considers the "positive aspect of this
decision", in the case where the Court reviewed
the settlement order at the behest
of the victims: he reads the Court as having
set aside the quashing of the prosecution
while holding that

>the memorandum of settlement ... leaves no
manner of doubt that a part of the consideration
for the payment of $470 million was the
stifling of the prosecution, and therefore,
unlawful and opposed to public policy.

This is contrary to what the judgment
records. In fact, the words Gonsalves'
extracts are from the attorney general's
argument recorded at page 642 of the
judgment. In fact, and in contrast, the
Court held:

>On a consideration of the matter, we
hold that the stifling of prosecution is _not_
attracted in the present case. In reaching
this conclusion, we do not put out of consideration
that it is inconceivable that the
Union of India would, under the threat of
prosecution, coerce UCC to pay us $470 million
or any part thereof as consideration for
stifling of the prosecution. In the context of
the Union of India the plea lacks as much
in reality as in a sense of proportionality
(p. 650, emphasis added).

While Gonsalves seems to believe that
the Court had revised its order quashing
the criminal proceedings because it considered
that it was a case of stifling of
prosecution, the Court actually said that it
was inconceivable that the Union of India
could be involved in stifling prosecution!

This mix up between argument and
court's dictum is in other parts of Gonsalves'
article, too (e.g, discussion in columns
2 and 3, p. 70). Gonsalves has also
missed another aspect of significance in
the way the Bhopal litigation developed.
The victims had not been heard when the
settlement order was passed. Victims'
groups and their supporters filed petitions
for the settlement order to be reviewed
and set aside. The review petitions were
heard and decided only after the challenge
to the Claims Act 1985 had been
heard and decided --- which happened only
by 22 December 1989. That same month in
1989, Parasaran, who had been the attorney
general through the hearings which
led to the settlement order and in the matter
of the Claims Act, stepped down since
the government had changed. The new
dispensation did not follow the route laid
out for them by Parasaran and the government
that he represented. Soli Sorabjee,
the new attorney general, was charged
with supporting the stand of the victims.
The way the case went after this was influenced
in large measure by this change in
circumstance. In his second stint as attorney
general, Sorabjee was to act in ways
that cast a shadow over his role in the
Bhopal criminal cases.

Among the more significant developments
that the law has seen in relation to
corporate accountability is the emergence
of the principle of "_strict_ and _absolute liability_".
This was introduced by the Bhagwati
court in 1986, using the oleum gas
leak in Delhi, and the case in which that
was considered, as an opportunity to develop
the law. Gonsalves' article is wrong
about the _strict liability_ principle, misses
the point about _absolute liability_, and does
not evince an awareness of the uses of
_strict_ and _absolute liability_ that has crept
into the law.

The legal and judicial politics of the
Bhopal case is intricate, and the many
players who could provide answers to
how, and if, corporations can be brought
to book are still around and should be
asked to speak to what happened, and
why it happened the way it did. This requires
that we understand, with some accuracy,
what happened in the Court in that
period. That is the reason that prompts
the setting out here of the complex path
that the criminal cases took in the years
between 1989 and 1991. The key to the
development of law, and its possibilities,
lies in these set of cases.

# Reviving the Criminal Cases

The Bhopal litigation reached the
Supreme Court when UCC contested an
order by the Madhya Pradesh High Court
that directed the corporation to pay
Rs 350 crore as interim compensation.[^/6]
On 14 February 1989, the Supreme Court
declared it had found that, in the circumstances
of the disaster, the "mass of data",
and the "offers and counter-offers", the
case was "pre-eminently fit for an overall
settlement between the parties covering
all litigations, claims, rights and liabilities
relating to and arising out of the disaster".
It ordered $470 million be paid in "full settlement":
"_To enable the effectuation of the
settlement_" (and this is an important qualifier),
it ordered that all civil proceedings
would be brought to a close and "all criminal
proceedings ... shall stand quashed
wherever these may be pending".[^/7] This
formula was reiterated in its further order
on 15 February 1989. In what was termed
"consequential terms of settlement",
counsel for the UCC, UCIL and Union of
India signed on to a document which
included a clause that "all such criminal
proceedings including contempt proceedings
stand quashed and accused deemed
to be acquitted".

The settlement order met with a volley
of protest from survivors, their supporters
and other activists. On 4 May 1989, when
the Court attempted to explain why it had
done what it had done in the settlementorder,
it limited its explanation to how it
had reached the sum of $470 million. On
the quashing of criminal cases, the court
would not speak. "The questions raised
(about the termination of criminal proceedings)
... merit consideration and we
should, therefore, abstain from saying
anything which might tend to prejudge
this issue one way or the other", was all
the court would say.[^/8]

In 1986, long before the settlement
order, victims' groups filed a constitutional
challenge to the Bhopal Gas Leak
Disaster (Processing of Claims) Act, 1985
by which the state had taken over the
civil litigation from the victims. It was
contended that this takeover was violative
of the rights that every person has under
Articles 14, 19(1)(g) and 21, which includes
the right to equality, and to life. Among
the reasons that provoked this response
was the contention that the state too had
to answer charges in connection with the
disaster, and so was a "joint-tortfeasor" in
law. In February 1989, when the settlement
order was announced, the case concerning
the Claims Act had not yet been
heard and decided. The settlement order
revived the questions raised against the
Claims Act. On 22 December 1989, the
Court pronounced its judgment on the
Claims Act --- against the backdrop of the
settlement order.

The Claims Act, 1985 gave the central
government the power to represent every
person "who has made, and is entitled to
make a claim for all purposes connected
with such claim in the same manner and
to the same effect as such person" (S.3(1)).
Victims and survivors could not have entered
into a compromise about the criminal
cases, especially since the charges at
that time --- including culpable homicide
not amounting to murder --- was noncompoundable,
that is, it could not be settled
between the parties. This was iterated,
and reiterated, in the Claims Act judgment.
The majority judgment recorded
this position: "This Act ... does not deal
with any question of criminal liability of
any of the parties concerned ... On an appropriate
reading of the relevant provisions
of the Act, it is apparent that the
criminal liability arising out of the Bhopal
gas leak disaster is not the subject matter
of this Act and cannot be said to have been
in any way affected, abridged or modified
by virtue of this Act" (682). This was reinforced
by the two judges who dissented,
but whose dissent was restricted to the
issue of interim compensation, but, who,
on the question of criminal liability, were
categorical that "this part of the settlement
comprises a term which is outside
the purview of the Act. The validity of the
Act cannot, therefore, be impugned on the
ground that it permits --- and should not
have permitted --- the withdrawal of criminal
proceedings against the delinquents"
(726--27).

The attorney general had also said that
"the Act only authorised the government
of India to represent the victims to enforce
their claims of damages under the Act.
The government as such had nothing to
do with the quashing of the criminal proceedings
and it was not representing the
victims in respect of the criminal liability
of the UCC or UCIL to the victims" (677).
According to the attorney general, this
had been an exercise of the plenary powers
of the Court under Article 136 and
Article 142 --- the latter article of the
constitution recognising a power in the
Supreme Court to do what is required to
be done in the "interests of complete
justice" (677).

Simply stated, the power to settle criminal
cases was not found in the Claims Act,
which was the law under which the Union
of India was conducting the litigation on
behalf of the victims.

This meant that the explanation had to
be provided by the "review" court.[^/9] It is
interesting that the Court does _not_ provide
such an explanation.

One circumstance that had an impact
on the ability of the Court to deal with the
challenge to its power, and use of that
power, was the shift in the government's
stand. By the time the review petitions
were heard, VP Singh had become prime
minister of the National Front government.
His government supported the
stand of the victims and their supporters
and argued that the settlement order be
set aside, and the proceedings against UCC
resumed.[^/10] The Court, therefore, could
only draw support from the argument of
Nariman, counsel for UCC, whose position
remained unchanged about upholding the
settlement order. "Shri Nariman submitted",
the Court said:

>that _if_ the Union of India as the _dominus
litis_ through its attorney general _invited
the court_ to quash the criminal proceedings
and the court accepting the request quashed
them, the power to do so was clearly
referable to Article 142(1) read with the
principle of section 321 CrPC (on withdrawal
of prosecution).

But, the Court did not say anywhere in
the judgment, if the attorney general had,
in fact, so invited the Court. There were
three judges on the review bench who had
been part of the settlement order court
--- Ranganath Mishra, M N Venkatachaliah
and N D Ojha. Nariman had been the
counsel for UCC through the period. Any
of them could have clarified what had
happened in February 1989. Yet, the "if"
kept the possibility in the realm of hypothesis.
So, the court acknowledged that "offences
alleged in the context of a disaster
of such opacity and magnitude should not
remain uninvestigated" and referred to
the "shifting stand of the Union of India"
which should "not by itself lead to any
miscarriage of justice". Then, in a statement,
that raises more questions than it
answers, the Court said: "We hold that no
specific ground or grounds for withdrawal
of the prosecution having been set out _at
that stage_ the quashing of the prosecutions
requires to be set aside".[^/11]

The Court asserted that it could do
what it had done in the settlement order
because of the constitutional provision
that gave it the power to do "complete justice".
But, it said, "it is really not so much a
question of the existence of power as one
of the jurisdiction for its exercise". So, it
was not that the power did not exist; it
was that the Court had not been given reasons
for exercising the power. If that
indeed was the case, why did the Court
allow the criminal cases to be settled?
There has been no answer to this question
so far, except for an unexplained reference
to "motive", and that was in the context
that I now hasten to set out.

Settlements ending court cases carry the
incidents of contracts, except that they carry
the imprimatur of the Court. A contract
is not complete without "consideration",
and consideration is what one party to a
contract gets in return for what they give to
the other party to the contract. When the
consideration falls, the contract too falls.

Setting aside a central clause in the settlement
order, and reviving criminal cases
against those who were protected from
prosecutions by the settlement, would,
logically, result in the settlement order
being set aside: but this was a consequence
the Court was keen to avert. It was
to Nariman that the Court turned, again,
The principle in law is that an agreement
where the "consideration" is unlawful and
against public policy is void. In the settlement
order, the Supreme Court had
recorded that the civil cases and the criminal
prosecutions were being brought to a
close "to enable the effectuation of the settlement".[^/12]
Counsel for the victims urged
that this amounted to "stifling of prosecution",
and that is unlawful and opposed to
public policy. Nariman suggested that this
was a misconception. The "true principle",
he said, was that non-compoundable
offences which are a matter of public concern
cannot be the subject of private bargains;
that administration of criminal justice
should not be allowed to pass from
judges to private individuals; but that the
doctrine of stifling of prosecutions is not
attracted where "there was a pre-existing
civil liability that was also settled and
satisfied".[^/13] And this doctrine would be
irrelevant where, as in the case on hand, it
was the Union of India that was acting in
place of the victims, for this could not be
said to be exploitation of any private individual
for private gains.

Then, the Court adopted the distinction
between "motive" and "consideration"
advanced by Nariman. It proceeded on the
basis that the quashing of the criminal
cases had not been "consideration" for the
settlement. That is, the quashing of criminal
cases was not the reason that induced
the parties to settle. Although the Court in
the review judgment does not refer to it,
this is supported by the statement that the
Court in the Claims Act case records the
attorney general as having made: "These
are not considerations that induced the
parties to enter the settlement".[^/14] Yet, if it
was not consideration, what could the
"motive" have been? There is not a word
in explanation. Was it because the government
wanted to close the cases to reassure
multinationals that they would be treated
gently if disasters raised the possibility of
liability, including criminal liability?
Perhaps. But, whatever it might have
been, it inhabits the uncertain universe of
a hypothesis.

An analysis of the four judgments produce
some startling conclusions:

* The Claims Act had nothing to do with
the criminal proceedings.
* The Court settled civil and criminal proceedings
"to enable effectuation of the
settlement".
* The Court considered that it had the
power to terminate criminal cases even
if it was contrary to the law, and it had
exercised the power in 1989.
* The court had been given no occasion to
quash the criminal cases, but it had
done it anyway.
* The quashing was not a consideration
for the settlement --- which may be distinguished
from _motive_ --- and neither is
explained by the Court.
* This could not be said to amount to
stifling of prosecution because it was
not a private individual, but the Union
of India, that had been party to
settling the cases which would stop all
prosecutions.
* Yet, the termination of the criminal
proceedings was not introduced into
the settlement by the Union of India.

Contradictions, and feebleness in the
application of rules and principle, abound.
In a matter of public importance such as
this, documents and persons which carry
the memory of what happened must be
persuaded to speak. Public policy cannot
proceed to be made in a void created by
individual and institutional silence.

# Role of the Attorneys General

Gonsalves' article repeatedly refers to Soli
Sorabjee as having presented the government's
case in the proceedings that cuiminated
in the settiement order and in the
challenge to the Claims Act. It was Parasaran
who was the attorney general when
these cases were being heard. In December
1989, Parasaran stepped down as the
attorney general, but by then both cases
had been heard and the Court made the
later pronouncement on 22 December 1989.
This is a significant circumstance
because, and as has been referred to
above, when Sorabjee took over as attorney
general, the government had
changed, and the position had shifted,
with the government now aligning itself
with the victims and their supporters.
This explains why the Court had only the
lawyer for the corporation supporting the
settlement order. This also explains what
the Court termed in its order as the "shifting
stand of the government". Gonsalves
misses this context altogether, leading to
confusion in his depiction of the role of the
attorney general, and the government.

It is Sorabjee's role in the extradition
proceedings of Warren Anderson that has
raised the hackles of the victims and their
supporters. In his second stint as the
attorney general on 6 August 2001, Sorabjee
gave it as his opinion that proceedings in
the US for extradition of Warren Anderson
were "not likely to succeed and, therefore,
the same may not be pursued". To make
extradition possible, certain "missing evidentiary
links" would have to be provided,
and, he said:

>In my opinion, although it is not impossible
to furnish the 'missing evidentiary links'
the time and effort would be considerable
and I am not sanguine at the end of the day.
the requisite evidentiary material would be
forthcoming.

According to him, "policy reasons" too
would prevent extradition --- reasons of
"humanitarian concerns", such as Anderson's
age said to be 81 years old and health
and length of time that has elapsed, almost
17 years, between the event and the
Indian government's decision to make a
formal request for his extradition.[^/15]

Years later, when the conviction of 7
June 2010 was hitting the news, Sorabjee
was to "reveal" to the press that he had
said _no_ to being on UCC's team of lawyers
because "my heart was with the victims"[^/16]
And, revising the meaning of his letter of
advice in 2001, he was to say:

>I did not advise the government not to seek
Anderson's extradition. I was asked to give
my opinion whether an extradition request
would be met and I said that it was unlikely.

which, he said, was an opinion based on
advice from a "reputed law firm". And,
"Sorabjee also said he had a meeting with
senior government officials, who said they
would be unable to dig out the kind of
rigorous evidence Washington needed to
extradite Anderson". "I cannot remember
whether they were from the home or
petroleum ministry", he is quoted as having
said, "but they said _aisa_ evidence _nahin
milega_". Laying the blame at the door of a
law firm or the home or petroleum
ministry when the attorney general was
tasked to advise the government, and
overriding the demand for accountability
and liability of the parent corporation and
its leadership despite having represented
the victims in the Court in 1990--91 may
leave the victims, and observers, not entirely
impressed with Sorabjee's interpretation
of a past that refuses to go away.

# A Judge in Question

Gonsalves' article not-so-subtly claims
that "one of the judges who delivered the
(Shriram)"[^/17] decision" was later advising
industry that the decision was not binding
in the matter of _strict liability_. This he bases
on the classic words that characterise
hearsay: "We are told". His reference to
Chief Justice Pathak's stint at the International
Court of Justice "soon after criminal
liability was quashed" could, however,
have drawn on existing literature.

Gobind Das, a senior advocate practising
in the Supreme Court, and who has
held the office of advocate general of
Orissa, in the 2000 edition of his 1987
book, _Supreme Court in Quest for Identity_
writes about the case; and the comments
with which the narrative is interspersed
speaks a language that cannot be
misunderstood:

>Bhagwati's court had laid the foundation
>of the law of tort ... with an eye on the Union
>Carbide case ... It was expected that
>Chief Justice Pathak would give appropriate
>shape to the doctrine of '_absolute liability_' ...
>the case was a battlefield of legal principle,
>and moral accountability. The opportunity
>would have been tempting for Chief Justice
>Pathak ... But the Pathak court turned away
>from it all (264).
>
>Hardly had the ink of the settlement dried,
> ... \[a\]llegations were hurled against the
>court and the judges, attributing mala
>fides. Improper motives were attributed
>to the Chief Justice. At that time the Prime
>Minister was politically lobbying for Chief
>Justice Pathak's nomination to the world
>court \[ICJ\] (267).

Then, Gobind Das quotes extensively
from Justice Krishna Iyer's _Justice at
Crossroads_ which carries an indictment of
the Court, especially Justice Pathak, and
where Justice Krishna Iyer comments on,
"the beholdenness of the candidate \[for
the ICJ\] to the litigant government in
getting the great office for him" (at 268).
Gobind Das concludes: "Indeed the leakage
of gas at Bhopal had an unfortunate
victim at Delhi, Chief Justice Pathak".
He goes on:

>It is said that a judge shall be a compound
of the faculties that are demanded of the
historian, the philosopher and the prophet.
The last demand upon him, to make some
forecast of the consequences of his action, is
perhaps the heaviest. It requires poetic sensibilities;
Chief Justice Pathak evidently had
lost this during the case in question, perhaps
due to his quest for the high office in the
World Court (269--70).

This book, brought out by a reputed law
publisher (Eastern Book Company) is
found on library shelves and in lawyers'
chambers. Gobind Das' reputation is impeccable.
Ten years have elapsed since its
publication, and this representation of
events, and their implications, have not
been rebutted or even challenged. On this
peg hangs a judicial tale.

# '_Absolute Liability_'

In the last section of Gonsalves' article are
many broad brush statements which may
lack somewhat in accuracy where they
may be strong on the rhetorical flourish.
The _Shriram_ case is otherwise known as
the oleum gas leak case. It concerns the
leakage of oleum gas from the _Shriram_
plant in Delhi on 4 December 1985 --- a year
and a day after Bhopal. The Bhagwati
court worked on principles that could be
useful in dealing with a mass disaster
such as Bhopal, and wrote it into the
_Shriram_ decision which was delivered in
December 1986. Gonsalves observations
about the _Shriram_ case, and the reduction
of the _strict liability_ principle into mere
verbiage without consequence, may not
be quite the way the law, in fact, stands.

First of all, the _Shriram_ principle was
not about "_strict liability_". Strict liability
pre-existed the _Shriram_ case, from its introduction
in _Rylands vs Fletcher_ in 1868.[^/18]
It is a principle that has pervasive presence
in law and, illustratively, it can be
found in the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and
the Public Liability (Insurance) Act, 1991.
Its significance is that it takes away the
burden of proving the "fault" of the offending
person from the victim. It is related
to "non-natural" user where the person
who brings on to their land any thing or
any process which then causes harm, for
which such person is strictly held liable.
The exceptions that the such person may
draw on to escape liability are --- where the
escape of the thing that causes harm is
due to an "act of god" (such as earthquakes,
floods); an act of a stranger
(sabotage); the person harmed has consented
to the escape of the thing from the
land; or, in certain cases where it is
authorised by law.

In the _Shriram_ case, the Bhagwati court
decided that they had to "evolve new principles
and lay down new norms which
would adequately deal with the new problems
which arise in a highly industrialised
economy". So they moved the law beyond
_strict liability_ to "_strict and absolute liability_".
"We would therefore hold", the Court
said, "that where an enterprise is engaged
in a hazardous or inherently dangerous
activity and harm results to anyone on account
of an accident in the operation of
such hazardous or inherently dangerous
activity, resulting, for example, in escape
of toxic gas, the enterprise is strictly and
absolutely liable to compensate all those
who are affected by the accident and such
liability is not subject to any of the exceptions
which operate vis-à-vis the tortious
principle of _strict liability_ under the rule
in _Rylands vs Fletcher_" (421).

In the review judgment, Justice Ranganath
Mishra did take a swipe at this principle,
suggesting that it was not a binding
pronouncement. But this shrugging off of
a legal principle has been expressly
rejected in a 1996 decision, _Indian Council
for Enviro-legal Action vs Union of India_.[^/19]
In that case, and others of its ilk, the
principle of _absolute liability_ has been
applied, urging along the polluter pays
principle.[^/20] In this context, it is interesting
to acknowledge Nariman's assertion
in relation to why UCC paid the $470 million.
Asked whether he was suggesting
--- in his 2004 December article the _Seminar_
 --- that the UCC could not be held liable on
the polluter pays principle, Nariman
replied: "Far from it: it is on this very
principle that the settlement of $470 million
was fashioned ..."[^/21]

The settlement order in the Bhopal gas
disaster case could be seen as marking a
moment when the collaboration that had
grown between the Court and those
socially committed to the use of the law in
public interest broke down. If answers to
the many questions that have arisen were
to emerge from the shadows into the glare
of public knowledge, may be it will lay at
rest some of the doubts and despair that
has dogged this case since 1989.

[^/1]: _Union Carbide Corporation vs Union of India_
(1989) 1 SCC 674 (settlement order), R S Pathak,
CJ, ES Venkataramaiah, Ranganath Mishra,
MN Venkatachaliah and ND Ojha, JJ.

[^/2]: _Union Carbide Corporation vs Union of India_
(1989) 3 SCC 38 (4 May order), R S Pathak, CJ,
E S Venkataramaiah, Ranganath Mishra,
MN Venkatachalian and ND Ojha, JJ.

[^/3]: _Charan Lal Sahu vs Union of India_ (1990) 1 SCC 613
(Claims Act), Sabyasachi Mukharji, CJ, KN Singh,
S Ranganathan, A MAhmadi, K N Saikia, JJ.

[^/4]: _Union Carbide Corporation vs Union of India_
(1991) 4 SCC 584 (review), Ranganath Mishra, CJ,
KN Singh, MN Venkatachaliah, A MAhmadi, and
ND Ojha, JJ.

[^/5]: _Keshub Mahindra vs State of MP_ (1996) 6 SCC 129,
AM Ahmadi, Majmudar, JJ.

[^/6]: Fali Nariman, counsel for UCC, was to say, 15
years later, that, in retrospect, he thought he had
been "very wrong" in appealing this order of the
high court, "I must confess that when I first read
Justice Sheth's judgment, I was not at all impressed
by the reasoning and attacked it with
considerable force before the Constitution bench
of the Supreme Court. I had submitted that it was
illogical. But, as they say, wisdom comes (sometimes!)
with age. Looking back, I find that the
judgment does afford as good a rationale as any I
can see, absent enacted law, for relieving hardship
caused to litigants in a mass tort action ... ".

    This was first published in the 2004 December issue
    of _Seminar_, and reproduced in Fali S Nariman
    (2010) _Before Memory Fades ... An Autobiography_
    at p. 218. This, of course, makes a strong case for
    the belief that, if the Court had heard the case instead
    of settling it, it could have found good
    ground for upholding the order of the high court
    for interim compensation, making the premature
    settling of the case unnecessary, and allowing an
    opportunity for establishing principles that could
    have helped in future cases.

[^/7]: _Supra_ note i.

[^/8]: _Supra_ note 2 at 12.

[^/9]: _Supra_ note 4.

[^/10]: Since Gonsalves seems not to have noticed this
shift, he makes mistakes about who supported the
victims, and at what stage in which proceedings.
More about that, _infra_.

[^/11]: _Supra_ note 4 al 638.

[^/12]: _Supra_ note i at 675.

[^/13]: _Supra_ note 4 at 645.

[^/14]: _Supra_ note 3 at 683.

[^/15]: Remember-bhopal.@lists.essential.org cited in
Usha Ramanathan, "A Critical Analysis of the Laws
Relating to Compensation for Personal Injury", PhD
thesis, September 2001 at p. 308, footnote 171,

[^/16]: "Sorabjee Turned Down Offer To Be Carbide
Lawyer", _Hindustun Times_, 17 June 2010.

[^/17]: Oleum gas leak decision reported in _M C Mehta vs
UOI_ (1987) 1 SCC 395.

[^/18]: (1868) LR3 HL 330.

[^/19]: (1996) 3 SCC 212 at 242.

[^/20]: See e.g, _Vellore Citizens Welfare Forum vs Union of
India_ (1996) 5 SCC 647 and the Nakkavagu case
reported in (1996) 5 SCALE 412 at 413--14 and
(1997) 1 SCALE (SP) 21.

[^/21]: Published in the "Letters" section of Seminar
February 2005, reproduced in his autobiography,
supra note 7, at p. 245.
