_The paper analyses the relationship between union politics and management
politics in a cooperative enterprise. The author observes
that as the enterprise is a cooperative venture playing a vital role
in the economic life of the local people, a certain degree of political
involvement is built into its management structure. This structure
has led to divisions among the workers on the lines of caste and
locality, which in turn influenced the union-management relations in
the enterprise._

\ 

It is widely recognised that trade unions in India are deeply involved
in politics.[^/1] The division among the unions is generally explained
in terms of rivalries between different political parties, overlooking the
role of management in dividing workers and unions. If the unions
have their political preferences, so have the managements, and the two
interact with one another in the industrial setting. The political forces in
the wider society often influence the relations between workers and
unions on the one hand and management on the other. This is particularly
significant for labour-management relations where the political
preferences of the union and the management are opposed to each other.
This paper attempts an analysis of the relationship between "union
politics" and "management politics" at the plant level.

It can be reasonably assumed that the relationship between union
politics and management politics will be meaningful only in a certain
environmental context : What does the factory produce? Is the factory
located in a rural or an urban setting? Who owns and controls the
factory? How is the labour force recruited and what is its social composition?
All these questions are relevant for an understanding of the
relationship of union, management, and politics, and they are kept in
mind while presenting the material and discussing its implications in
the following pages.

# THE SETTING

The factory, which will be called _Kisan_ (a pseudonym), is a sugar
cooperative located near a village in Ahmednagar district in Maharashtra.
_Kisan_ was established in 1953 (and it went into production in
1955--56) with the initiative of the local peasant leaders and the sympathetic
support of the government with a view to providing a stable and
better return to the local sugarcane growers for their produce. The
shareholders of the factory (they were 1,044 in 1963--64) are all sugarcane
growers spread over the 59 villages included in the "area of operation"
of the factory.[^/2] Most of them belong to the local peasant castes,
such as Maratha, Mali, and Karekar. Among these, the locally "dominant"
Marathas constituted over 60 per cent of the shareholders.[^/3]
The directors on the board of management are elected from amongst
the shareholders. In all, there are thirteen elected directors on the
board and among them the Marathas form the majority. The majority
of shareholders are small peasants with not more than three acres of
land under sugarcane. In other words, the management of the factory
is composed of local peasant leaders and not "capitalists" in the usual
sense of the term. What is more, the "local"[^/4] workers in the factory
have caste, kinship, and village ties with the shareholders and directors.
As the position of director is associated with considerable prestige,
certain material gains and power of patronage, there is intense competition
among local peasant leaders to become the directors of the factory.
The directors often try to use their position and the resources of the
factory to increase their following and to serve their political ends. The
leading directors have always been closely associated with the local
organisations of the political parties or factions within them.

In 1963--64, when field work for this study was done, _Kisan_ employed
889 workers (the number slightly varies from time to time) including
the supervisory and managerial staff. Among these, 450 workers were
permanent and the rest were seasonal, employed for nearly seven months
in a year during the crushing season. The majority of workers are
semi-skilled or unskilled. About 25 per cent of the workers are "local".
There are 92 workers who came from other States such as Uttar Pradesh
and Bihar. These workers are locally known as "_Bhaiyas_". The
numerically significant caste groups among the workers are : Marathas
(258), Neo-Buddhists --- formerly belonging to the untouchable caste
of Mahar --- (148), Brahmins (72), Dhangars (28), and Malis (17). The
remaining workers are distributed in small numbers among a large
number of castes. There is a broad correlation between the caste affiliation
of a worker and the nature of the job he holds. Brahmins are
mainly found in the clerical, skilled, and supervisory posts, while the
Neo-Buddhists are mainly engaged in unskilled and semi-skilled
manual work. Marathas are found in all occupational categories.

A large number of unskilled and semi-skilled workers were employed
by the factory in 1953 when the erection work was in progress.
Initially, the wages and working conditions were not sufficiently attractive
to induce local labour to seek employment in it. The management
also discouraged the recruitment of local labour for fear that it would
create scarcity of agricultural labour and adversely affect sugarcane
cultivation in the area. The senior officers of the factory who had
influence over the recruitment of workers were mostly Brahmins from
outside the region. They too favoured the appointment of "outside"[^/5]
workers in the hope that they would be more obedient as compared to
local workers who had access to the shareholders and directors. The
outside workers, in turn, took avidly to employment in _Kisan_. The ex-untouchables
were attracted by the prospect of regular employment free
from the disabilities of village social life. To the _Bhaiyas_, who had
already been employed in sugar factories elsewhere, _Kisan_ afforded
avenues for upward mobility.

# THE UNION POLITICS

There are six sugar factories in the _taluka_, three of which are private
enterprises and the rest cooperatives. They together employ nearly
eight thousand workers. The private or joint-stock factories were
established in the late thirties while the cooperatives have come up
since the early fifties. The Taluka Sugar Workers Union (_TSU_), affiliated
to the Hind Mazdoor Sabha (_HMS_), enjoys "representative"
status for the _taluka_ as a whole under the Bombay Industrial Relations
Act of 1946.

Initially this union was controlled by the Communists. They tried
to organise a strike in the early forties. The unsuccessful strike disillusioned
the workers and weakened the hold of the Communists over
them. The local Congress leaders took advantage of the situation and
succeeded in capturing the union around 1945. The day-to-day work
of the union was carried on by a small band of followers of the Congress--Socialist
Party led by a young Brahmin lawyer from the neighbouring
town. When the Congress--Socialists decided to break away from the
Congress to form a separate party of their own in 1948, the union came
to be controlled by the new Socialist Party which was later renamed
Praja Socialist Party (_PSP_). The _PSP_ has maintained its control over
the union ever since.

The _TSU_ has about 3,000 members. The union is in a sound
financial position. Its funds are used, among other things, for maintaining
offices at the _taluka_ and branch levels, for paying the salaries of
the full-time union organisers at both the levels and for fighting court
cases on behalf of the workers. A _PSP_ leader at the national level was
the president of the _TSU_. There is a full-time paid general secretary who
was formerly employed in one of the local private sugar factories as an
unskilled worker. He comes from another district of Maharashtra
and belongs to a "minority" caste.[^/6] The president and the general
secretary are assisted by a committee whose members represent the six
branches in the six sugar factories including _Kisan_. A prominent lawyer
and _PSP_ leader from Poona acts as the legal adviser to the union and
represents it in various court cases.

There are close links between the _TSU_ and the local _PSP_. In
addition to the president, who was a party leader at the national level,
the general secretary was one of the secretaries of the State unit of the
party. The secretaries of the branches, including the _Kisan_ branch, are
all active workers of the party. The union, in fact, provides the main
basis of support for the party in the region. The following of the party
outside the factory areas is almost negligible. Actually, the _PSP_ in
this area has, over a period of time, acquired the image of a workers'
party. Whenever the party gives a call for a _bandh_ or a token strike,
the union always supports it. The union leaders, particularly the secretaries
and the committee members at the factory and _taluka_ levels, take
leading part in organising meetings, marches, and processions on
behalf of the party, and persuade the union members to participate in
those activities. The union also helps to raise funds for the party. The
general secretary contested on the _PSP_ ticket for an Assembly seat,
although from constituencies outside this area, three times during the
last five years. On all these occasions, he derived financial and other
support from the members of the union. Although the _PSP_ did not
put up any candidate of its own for the local Assembly or Lok Sabha
constituency during the last three general elections, it has always
supported some candidate or the other against the Congress. During
all these elections, the _TSU_ as well as its branches passed resolutions
supporting the opposition candidates on behalf of the workers.

# THE CLEAVAGE IN THE UNION

The _Kisan_ branch of the _TSU_ is active ever since the factory went
into production. The outside workers belonging to the minority castes
were the first to join the union in large numbers and constituted the
hard core of the supporters of the union. The _Kisan_ branch, like the
other five branches, is headed by a full-time paid secretary assisted by
a local council of 25 members drawn from the different departments
of the factory. In addition, there is an executive committee of eight
members which meets more frequently to discuss important matters
and advise the secretary in his work. The present secretary has been
associated with the branch since its inception. Like the general
secretary, he also comes from outside the district and belongs to one
of the minority peasant castes. Before becoming full-time secretary,
he was employed in another cooperative sugar factory in the _taluka_.
He was an active unionist even during the period of his employment in
the factory.

The composition of the _TSU_'s membership in _Kisan_ significantly
influenced the management's attitude towards the union. More than
60 per cent of the workers in _Kisan_ had been organised by the _TSU_
though not all of them paid their subscription regularly or in time. The
proportion of union members was more among the unskilled and semiskilled
workers than among the higher categories of employees. Similarly,
it was higher among the ex-untouchable castes and other minority
castes than among the locally dominant Maratha caste. Moreover,
the outside workers were proportionately more than the local
ones in the union. For instance, almost all the _Bhaiyas_ were loyal
members of the union. The main reason for this situation was that
while the local workers, particularly from the dominant and other
peasant castes could count on their caste, kinship, and village ties with
the shareholders and directors of the factory to safeguard their
interests, the other workers had to depend exclusively on the union
strength.

Soon after its establishment, the _Kisan_ branch of the _TSU_ started
exerting pressure on the management to comply with the various
provisions of the labour legislation. In 1957, it succeeded in
negotiating for better wages, security of employment, regular fixed
holidays, and leave facilities for the workers. This was considered
to be the most beneficial agreement from the point of view of the
workers.

The initial success of the union was largely due to its monopoly
in representing the workers. This did not, however, mean that it
always remained solidly united without any element of dissention. In
fact a certain degree of division within its ranks was inherent in its
monopoly position. Although the outside workers formed the core of
its supporters, some of the local employees had also joined the union
since it was the only organisation representing the workers. This situation
soon resulted in a broad division in its rank and file between the
local and the outside workers. The local but weaker faction felt that
the union favoured the outside workers who were its active supporters.
In the settlement of scales of pay they believed that the union pressed
for better terms for its active supporters while it agreed to place the
local workers in relatively lower scales. They also felt neglected by the
union in the redressal of their grievances such as allotment of houses,
leave, etc. Thus, they resented the domination of the union by outsiders.
Moreover, they complained about the mismanagement of
union funds. They were critical of the fact that the money collected
at the branch was not fully utilised for their benefit but was credited to
the main office of the _TSU_. What is more, some of the workers belonging
to the local peasant castes supported the Congress and the Peasants
and Workers Party (_PWP_). They did not appreciate the close
association between the union and the _PSP_. This discontent among
the local members of the union came in handy for the management to
manipulate the situation to its advantage.

# THE MANAGEMENT POLITICS

The board of management of _Kisan_ was divided, till 1959--60, between
two opposing factions broadly based on political lines. One faction
was closely associated with the Congress while the other consisted
of the supporters of the _PWP_ and sympathisers of the Communist Party.
The two factions opposed each other in the elections to the board of
management of _Kisan_ and other cooperatives as well as in the elections
to the various local self-governing bodies, the State legislature and Parliament.
The division within the management thus limited its ability
to deal with the union boldly and effectively.

Although the majority of local workers were discontented with
the working of the _TSU_ and some of the directors were sympathetic
to them, the management could not come to their help as these workers
were the minority in the union and the management itself was divided.

The major source of friction within the union and the factory was
the existence of a large number of outside workers. As described
earlier, these workers were recruited during the initial period due to
lack of interest on the part of the local people in securing factory employment
and the reluctance of the peasant directors to recruit them.
But soon after the initial period was over, there was considerable improvement
in the wages and working conditions of the workers. Attracted
by these improvements in the conditions of factory workers the
local people began pressing the directors for jobs in the factory. But
the factory already had a full complement of workers and there was
little scope for further recruitment. The management could not recruit
new workers without removing the old ones. It also realised that
any such attempt on its part would be strongly opposed by the union.
It felt that it could have done this had the union been under its control.
The division within the management precluded any action against the
existing union because the ruling group on the board feared that the
opposition group would exploit the issue in the forthcoming elections
to the board.

The management also resented the close association between the
_TSU_ and the _PSP_. In 1957, one of the prominent directors of _Kisan_
contested for the local Assembly seat as a Congress candidate. All
the branches of the union campaigned against him, and he polled poorly
in all the factory booths, which was one of the factors that contributed
for his defeat. As a result, the director and his supporters strongly
felt the need for a "company union" which would be sympathetic
to the Congress. However, they could not take any step in this direction
because any such move would have been strongly opposed by their
political opponents on the board of management.

During 1959--60, there were important developments in local politics
which brought about a greater unity in the board of management.
After the establishment of the separate State of Maharashtra out of the
former bilingual Bombay State on May 1, 1960, the Congress leadership
in Maharashtra followed the policy of inviting the leaders and
followers of the opposition parties to the Congress fold and of offering
them important positions in the party organisation as well as in the
government. The directors of _Kisan_ belonging to the opposition parties
also joined the Congress. As a result, the next elections to the
board of management of _Kisan_ and several other cooperatives and 10cal
bodies were held without any contest. This "period of unity", as
it was called, continued for about three years.

The unity in the board brought about a closer and more intimate
relationship between the management and the local Congress party.
Some of the directors occupied important positions in the local party
organisation, and contested elections as Congress candidates in the
Assembly and Zilla Parishad elections. The Congress leaders made
use of _Kisan_ as one of the important bases of support for the party.
They collected money from the shareholders, often by compulsion, for
party funds, organised camps and meetings for party members on the
factory premises using the resources of the factory, used the factory's
vehicles for attending party conferences at distant places, and utilised
its resources during election campaigns. The close association of the
management with the Congress party and the association of the _TSU_
with the _PSP_ sharpened the cleavage between the management and the
union.

The unity in the board of management made the directors more
confident in dealing boldly with the _TSU_. They decided to sponsor a
union which would cooperate with the management and be closer to
the Congress. A. natural ally in this venture was the Indian National
Trade Union Congress (_INTUC_) controlled by the Congress. Prominent
_INTUC_ leaders were invited by the management to guide the
new union which they hoped would eventually replace the _TSU_. They
also felt that such a union would be a powerful instrument in their hands
in winning the general elections and the elections to the local bodies
like the Zilla Parishad. They were confident of securing the support of
the local workers who were dissatisfied with the _TSU_.

Thus, there were three important factors which changed the attitude
and policy of the management with regard to the _TSU_. First,
there was already a section among the workers, consisting chiefly of
local men, which was dissatisfied with the working of the _TSU_ for reasons
already discussed. Second, the management itself felt the need
for a union under its control for providing jobs and distributing other
benefits to the local men of their choice and for using it for securing the
support of workers in the election of the local Congress candidates
associated with the management. Third, the management felt confident
of achieving these objectives because it was now united under
one political party.

Since the _TSU_ enjoyed "representative" status for the _taluka_ as
a whole, the _INTUC_ unit was established at the _taluka_ level with a
branch in the _Kisan_ factory. The local Congress party supported the
move with financial and other contributions. The Taluka Congress
Committee paid for the honorarium of the full-time organisers of the
_INTUC_. An important Congress leader and chairman of another
cooperative sugar factory in the area was made president of the new
union. This position was later held by a Congress M.L.A. and trade
union leader from another district. One of the directors of _Kisan_ became
its treasurer. Several of the local workers who resented the domination
of outsiders in the _TSU_ voluntarily became its members. The
organisers and leaders of the new union were allowed to work for it
even at the cost of neglecting their official duties in the factory. In
deciding several issues affecting the workers, the management was often
guided by the advice of the leaders of the new union.

The _INTUC_ union, as it was popularly known in the factory, planned
to increase its membership substantially and to reduce the membership
of the _TSU_ so that it could challenge the latter's representative
status. It was confident of securing representative status after increasing
the membership since the local Congress leaders were influential
in the government and had close contacts with the State ministers.
It resorted to all possible means including threats and intimidation to
break up the _TSU_. Some of the key leaders among the workers were
promised promotion and higher pay while those who opposed were
threatened with loss of job and even violence. In order to win over the
workers from the old union the management agreed to increase the
dearness allowance to all the workers on the advice of the _INTUC_.
When the issue of fixation of grades according to the report of the First
Wage Board for Sugar Industry came up, the management bypassed
the representative union (_TSU_) and started negotiations with the _INTUC_
leaders. In order to secure better grades, several workers joined the
_INTUC_.

These attempts by the management to destroy the _TSU_ were strongly
resisted by the latter. The _TSU_ leaders asked the workers not to
join the _INTUC_. In fact, the core of its supporters refused to do so.
Some workers paid their subscription, often secretly, to both the unions
in order to please them both. The emergence of the "company union"
sharpened the division among the workers. The loyal supporters of
the _TSU_ who stood by it during this critical period were mostly outside
workers, largely from the unskilled and semi-skilled categories of
jobs and mainly belonging to the ex-untouchable castes or other "minority"
castes. The open supporters of the _INTUC_ were mostly local
workers belonging to the local peasant castes and from the semi-skilled,
unskilled, and clerical occupational categories. Many of them had
close ties with the shareholders and directors. A few members of the
supervisory staff also supported the _INTUC_. The intense rivalry between
the two unions created great tension in the factory and further
worsened the relations between the _TSU_ and the management. The
leaders of the _INTUC_ created an atmosphere of terror among the workers.
They made it impossible for the _TSU_ leaders to hold meetings
of workers on the premises of the factory. As one worker put it,
"the _INTUC_ was largely a _goonda_ affair".

The rivalry between the two unions and the stiff opposition to the
_INTUC_ by the loyal supporters of the _TSU_ led the _INTUC_ and the
management to take a bold step which had far-reaching consequences
for both the unions. The step involved the removal of 105 seasonal
workers by the management on the advice of the _INTUC_ leaders. All
these workers were loyal supporters of the _TSU_. Over 90 per cent of
them were ex-untouchables and outsiders. The management accepted
this advice because it provided it an opportunity to recruit local men
of its choice. It also hoped that this would weaken the hold of the
_TSU_ over the remaining workers and would hasten its breakdown. Although
the management did not seek any legal advice before taking this
decision, it was hopeful of pushing through the decision since the workers
were not permanent. The management had earlier won two court
cases against the _TSU_. This had boosted its confidence and was partly
responsible for the bold decision. The vacancies arising out of the
removal of these workers were filled in by appointing local men mostly
belonging to the peasant castes and connected with the shareholders and
directors through caste, kinship, and village ties. All of them joined
the _INTUC_. But the management had overlooked the fact that there
had been no break in the service of the dismissed workers in the preceding
year. This was a factor in favour of the dismissed workers.

The _TSU_ treated this as a challenge to its very survival and took
the cases of the dismissed workers to the court. The case went on for
about two years. The _TSU_ tried to provide whatever financial support
it could to the affected workers during the period. Ultimately it won
the case, and the dismissed workers were ordered to be reinstated with
40 per cent compensation for the losses they had suffered during the
intervening period. This came as a big blow to the _INTUC_, and it
boosted the confidence of the _TSU_ helping it to recover its strength
among the workers.

When the membership of the _INTUC_ had increased with the removal
of the 105 workers, its leaders tried their best to secure representative
status for their union. For this purpose, they approached the
State level Congress leaders including the State labour minister. But
they were disillusioned to find that these leaders were reluctant to support
them in their move. The State labour minister and the others
feared that such a move might jeopardise the representative status of
the _INTUC_ in other areas.

Along with the task of building up the new union, the _INTUC_
organisers were active in the local Congress politics, particularly during
the elections. In 1962, one of the important directors and an old
Congressman was the Congress candidate for the local Assembly seat.
The same leader had been defeated as the Congress candidate in the
1957 elections. The chairman of the factory who was a new Congressman,
(he joined the party in 1960), was a candidate for the Zilla Parishad.
The _INTUC_ organisers and supporters actively campaigned for them.
Some of the workers were shown to be on duty in the factory records
during their absence for the election work. The supporters of the _TSU_
worked for the opposition candidates during these elections. Both the
Congress candidates won the elections. This was the culminating point
of the management's interest in the _INTUC_.

Soon after the 1962 general elections, a serious clash developed
between a senior executive of the factory and one of his subordinates
who was also a leading organiser of the _INTUC_. The latter was found
to be guilty of insubordination and was suspended pending inquiry.
Since both the employees had their kinsmen and supporters among the
directors, the case posed a threat to the unity of the board of management.
After protracted deliberations a compromise decision was
arrived at and the subordinate official was allowed to resume his work
after tendering apology to the offended executive. This episode made
the directors realise the danger in encouraging employees to undertake
union work and proved to be one of the factors contributing to the
decline of the _INTUC_.

At the end of 1962, following the dispute over the elections to the
District Central Cooperative Bank, serious differences developed among
the local Congress leaders, and two sharply divided factions emerged,
broadly pitting the old Congressmen against the new entrants to the
party. The old Congressmen were led by the M.L.A. director and the
new ones by the chairman of the factory, who was also the President of
the Zilla Parishad. The board of management of _Kisan_ was also
divided on these factional lines.

# THE CLEAVAGE IN THE MANAGEMENT

All these developments had a decisive impact on the fortunes of
the two rival unions. The attempts to foster the _INTUC_ union completely
failed and the _TSU_ was further strengthened in the process due
to a number of factors. First, the success of the _TSU_ in getting the 105
workers reinstated not only strengthened its hold over the workers, but
also made the management realise its folly in accepting the advice of the
_INTUC_ leaders at a great financial loss to the factory. Some of the
directors later criticised the policy of the management in this matter.
One of the influential directors who had taken a leading part in encouraging
the _INTUC_ later admitted that it was a wrong policy even
from the point of view of the management's interest. "After this experience,
I have come to the conclusion that the management should
not directly interfere in union matters," he said. Second, the difficulties
in ousting the representative union under the existing legal framework
disappointed the supporters of the _INTUC_ and sapped their enthusiasm.
Third, once the Assembly and Zilla Parishad elections were
over, the directors' interest in the _INTUC_ waned away. As another
prominent director admitted later, "I know, it is not proper for the
management to form a workers' union. But we did it for the elections."
Fourth, the clash between the two factory officials involving an _INTUC_
leader further contributed to the decline of the management-sponsored
union. Finally, the emergence of sharp divisions within the management
led to the further withdrawal of its interest in the _INTUC_ affairs.
Moreover, the active supporters of the _INTUC_ were themselves divided
in their loyalties to the two rival factions within the management. As a
result of all these factors, the _INTUC_ soon became a defunct body
and died a natural death. But the efforts of the management to break
the _TSU_ have not entirely ceased. During the last three years, the
Neo-Buddhist workers in the factory were under pressure from the
Republican party, founded by the late B. R. Ambedkar, to secede from
the _TSU_ and form a union of their own. The ruling faction in the
management has also encouraged this move following an alliance
between the Congress and Republican parties during the recent Zilla
Parishad elections. However, their efforts to split the _TSU_ have not
succeeded.

The division within the management had brought about changes
in the relationship between the _TSU_ and the management. During the
recent general elections, the leaders of both the factions had applied for
the Congress ticket for the local Assembly seat. The chairman of
_Kisan_ who led the new Congressmen was granted the Congress ticket.
The sitting MLA and leader of the old Congressmen resigned from the
party along with his supporters and set up an independent candidate to
defeat the Congress candidate. The _taluka_ unit of the _PSP_ and the _TSU_
decided to support the independent candidate. The directors belonging
to the ex-MLA faction in the factory and the leaders of the _TSU_ in all
the branches worked together during the elections and succeeded in
defeating the Congress candidate. In all the factory booths in the
constituency the independent candidate polled heavily as against the
Congress candidate.

This cooperation between them continued during the _panchayat_
and Zilla Parishad elections. The _Kisan_ workers' colony was treated
as part of the neighbouring village for the purposes of _panchayat_
elections. The secretary of the _Kisan_ branch of the _TSU_ had attempted,
in 1962, to get elected to the village _panchayat_. But he could not
succeed as the Congress was united at that time. This time the faction
led by the ex-MLA helped him in securing the support of the villagers
outside the factory colony where the secretary had no following. As a
result, he had succeeded for the first time in capturing the village _panchayat_.
He had been elected the _Sarpanch_ of the _panchayat_ while his wife
and two of his supporters in the _Kisan_ branch of the _TSU_ had been
elected as members.

# CONCLUSIONS

As the foregoing analysis points out, the fact of _Kisan_ being a cooperative
enterprise, the divisions among the workers on the lines of
caste and locality, the association of the _TSU_ and the management with
rival political parties, and the role of the government machinery in
sticking to the legal provisions regarding industrial relations, all have
influenced the strategies of the union and the management.

_Kisan_ is a cooperative agro-based industry located in a rural setting.
The majority of its shareholders, unlike those of the enterprises
in the private sector, are not only small peasants but also suppliers of
raw material. Moreover, ownership and control in _Kisan_ are not
clearly separated as in the joint-stock enterprises. In addition to obtaining
a better price for their produce, they are also interested in securing
employment and other benefits for the local peasant leaders. It does
not represent, even remotely, the stereotype of "capitalists". As a
cooperative venture playing a vital role in the economic life of the
local people a certain degree of political involvement is built in the
management structure of _Kisan_. Politics enters the factory, because
its board of management is a body elected by more than a thousand
voters spread over a fairly wide area. It is a centre of power for the
control of which there is an intense competition among the peasant
leaders as it provides them with prestige, patronage and power. It is
also a powerful instrument for local politicians to strengthen their position
in the wider political system. And these features of _Kisan_ as an
enterprise influenced the management goals. The directors wanted to
control the union to use it as an instrument for winning the elections.
In order to increase their following, they also wanted to use it for distributing
jobs, favours, and patronage to the people of their choice.

The labour force of _Kisan_ is not part of a larger and organised
working class milieu as in the big industrial centres. The employment
of local workers with close social ties with the shareholders and directors
tends to blur the sharp distinctions between employers and employees.
Unlike in the private sugar factories in the same area, the slogans
of class war do not make much impact on the workers of _Kisan_. In
this context it is significant to note that there has never been a strike
in _Kisan_ and this is true of most of the sugar cooperatives in the State.
But cleavages and conflicts are not entirely absent in _Kisan_. Caste
and locality were the two important factors that divided the _TSU_.
They were also the major source of friction in the union relationship
with management. The conflict between the management and the _TSU_
was accentuated due to their association with rival political parties.

The strategy of the management was to exploit the divisions within
the _TSU_ to use the discontented local element among the workers to
build up a company union and to take advantage of its influence in the
higher government circles to replace the _TSU_. This strategy was adopted
seriously only when the directors were united. They gave up these
attempts as soon as cracks reappeared within their ranks.

The union also adopts the strategy of exploiting the divisions
within the management. Its major source of strength is the loyalty
of its members, particularly the outsiders and those belonging to the
ex-untouchable and minority castes. The union is the sole protector
of their interests. Many of them say, "In the absence of the union,
the _bagaitdars_ (sugarcane growers) would treat us like their farm labour.
They would drive us out whenever they want." The union's close
association with a political party gives its leaders a sense of identity,
purpose, confidence, and strength. The _TSU_ survived the challenge
posed by the _INTUC_ and the serious crisis created by the removal of a
large number of its members due mainly to the legal provisions which
tend to protect representative unions and the non-interference of the
government machinery by upholding law and justice against dominant
local pressures.

Like many other unions, the _TSU_ is also politically involved. But
the nature of involvement becomes more meaningful if it is seen in relation
to the management's involvement in politics. The understanding
of the relationship between union politics and management politics,
thus, contributes to our understanding of labour-management relations
in the context of the wider political system. _Kisan_ may be an
atypical case of industrial relations, but it does indicate the need for
undertaking studies of similar kind in different parts of the country to
arrive at conclusions of a more general nature.[^/7]

[^/1]: Recent important works on the subject include :

    (i) Harold Crouch, _Trade Unions and Politics in India_, Bombay, Manaktalas, 1966.
    (ii) N. Pattabhi Raman, _Political Involvement of India's Trade Unions_, Bombay, Asia
    Publishing House, 1967.

[^/2]: The area of operation of the factory is laid down in its bye-laws.

[^/3]: The Marathas are dominant in the area in the sense in which Srinivas uses the term,
They are numerically preponderant, enjoy political and economic power, and a fairly
high, though not the highest, ritual status. For a systematic discussion of the concept
of dominant caste, see M. N. Srinivas, "The Dominant Caste in Rampura", _American
Anthropologist_, Vol. 61, February 1959, pp. 1--16.

[^/4]: In this paper, the workers belonging to the villages in the area of operation of the factory
are called "local".

[^/5]: Those who are not "local" are termed "outsiders",

[^/6]: All castes except the dominant Marathas are called "minority" castes in this paper.
The local people also use the Marathi equivalent of the same term.

[^/7]: This study, which forms part of a larger project, was made under the guidance of
Dr. M. S. A. Rao. Dr. Andre Beteille and Dr. N. R. Sheth gave valuable suggestions
and encouragement for writing the paper. Mr. E. A. Ramaswamy made extensive comments
which proved very useful while revising the earlier draft. The author is grateful
to all of them.
