# Abstract

_The decade of the 1930s provided a near perfect backdrop for a leftist surge in
Indian national politics whose trajectory so far had been mapped under the
political leadership of Gandhi. It had its moments of excitement, glory and
disappointments. Although ample opportunities presented themselves to the Left
to decisively influence the nationalist struggle during this period, it failed in its
endeavour to play a historical role, beaten by a smarter, tactful, opportunist
'Old guard', the 'right-wing' leadership of the Indian National Congress, who, as
events indicated in the later years, left behind all scruples to cling to political
power._

\ 

(Key words used: Left-wing (LW), Right-wing (RW), Congress
Socialist Party (CSP), Gandhi, Subhas Bose, Jayaprakash Narayan).

\ 

\ 

The tame end of the civil disobedience movement (1932--33) in its
later phase in the face of massive political repression hastened a
discernible attitudinal shift in the minds of 'distraught' Congressmen.
Many of them were young and ardent nationalists who pursued
variants of Marxist ideology with a mind to radicalise Congress policies
and programmes so that freedom acquires a 'fuller meaning'. It also
included 'left-inclined' nationalist leaders, such as Jawaharlal Nehru
and Subhas Chandra Bose, who played critical roles in the pursuance
of the 'left' vision within the Congress. A conscious effort thus began
during this period towards exploring possibilities of infusing a socialist
content into Congress programmes, and correspondingly, transform
the composition of the leadership of the national movement.

As the civil disobedience movement ground to a halt, men
with considerable stature as rural constructive workers, such as
Vallabhbhai Patel, Rajendra Prasad and Rajagopalachari among
others, were attracted towards swarajist politics of legislature entry.
There were also those such as Bhulabhai Desai, B. C. Roy and a number
of others who were unenthusiastic even about Gandhian forms of mass
struggle; more comfortable in the world of municipal or assembly
politics. Blessed by Gandhi, a conference of the swarajists held on May
2--3, 1934, gave an idea of their projected party.

Businessmen like Thakurdas and Birla 'cultivated' Congress leaders
like Bhulabhai Desai and Vallabhabhai Patel. 'I should like you to keep
yourself in touch with Bhulabhai', Birla advised Thakurdas on 12 April, 1934. 'If the Swaraj Party is to be successful ... that the right type of
men are being sent.' And again, on 3 August, 1934, 'Vallabhai, Rajaji
and Rajendra Babu are all fighting Communism and Socialism. It is
therefore necessary that some of us should help Gandhiji as far as
possible and work with a common object'.[^/1]

This statement was an early indication about the intentions of
the Congress RW, inasmuch as their preparation for the 'control'
of Congress leadership in the following years.

Yet the first political stirrings of left activism became visible with
the emergence of 'Congress socialists', in May 1934, the same month
as the 'new' Swaraj Party was formed. Known as the 'Nasik jail group',
it was actively guided by a 'confirmed' Marxist, Jayaprakash Narayan,
and included Achyut Patwardhan, Yusuf Mehrally, Minoo Masani and
Ashok Mehta. They held a conference at Patna, prior to the AICC
session 'to prevent an outright drift to constitutionalism and to put a
more dynamic programme before the country ... .' In October 1934,
at a conference in Bombay, the Congress Socialist Party (CSP) was
formed. The objective of the CSP was keen to remain as a 'distinct
Socialist ginger group working within the Congress but trying to push
it leftwards'. The group had an ideological composition ranging from
a 'vague and mixed up radical nationalism to fairly firm advocacy of
Marxian scientific socialism' thereby providing a 'broad framework of
reference for left forces to operate freely'.[^/2] The CSP observed that
'... for a subject nation political independence is an inevitable stage
on the way to socialism'; 'that the present stage of Indian struggle is
that of the bourgeois democratic revolution ...'; and that 'it would be
suicidal policy to cut ourselves off from the national movement that
the Congress undoubtedly represents.' Further, the 'shortcomings of
Congress as an anti-imperialist body' was to be overcome by making
'ceaseless efforts to give it a socialist direction' --- the adoption of
leadership of a revolutionary socialism 'thesis' two years later at the
Meerut conference of the CSP in January 19--20 1936. Speaking at the
CSP Conference at Bombay in 1934, Narendra Deva further justified
the creation of the CSP in sociological terms: The Congressmen's
'social basis being very narrow they really feel stronger by entertaining
the belief that they are acting in interests of society as a whole'.
'Congress', he felt, needed 'to promote an alliance between the lower
middle class and the masses'. The CSP felt that it was the 'political
vehicle' through which Congress leaders could secure a wider appeal to
the masses that would inevitably lead to the radicalization of Congress
programmes and policies.

[^/1]: Sumit Sarkar, _Modern India 1885--1947_ (New Delhi: Macmillan, 1983), p. 331.

[^/2]: Sumit Sarkar, _Modern India_, p. 332; Narendra Deva, _Socialism and National Revolution_
(Bombay: Padma Publications 1946), p. xii.; Asoka Mehta, _Sheaves from Forgotten Fields,
PSP Silver Jubilee Conference Souvenir_ (Delhi, 1959), pp. 18, 63; 56--7.

Mainly at the insistence of Jayaprakash Narayan the CSP formulated
a complex ideological and organisational venture to involve the
Communist Party of India (CPI) banned by the British government
for a period of eight years in July 1934, the Royists and to a lesser
extent the Bengal Labour Party, Kirti Kisan Party and the Bengal
Communist Party[^/3] to make a concerted effort to pose a radical sociopolitical
alternative to Congress programmes.

The close relation between the CSP and the CPI, the two significant
partners in LW became apparent by autumn 1934. They reached a
joint action agreement in the trade unions, notably, the All India CSP,
All India Trade Union Congress (AITUC), National Trade Union
Federation, and Red Trade Union Congress. It is worth a note as to
why the CSP's 'socialist unity' experiment proffered an active role to
CPI? Was it due to the fact that CSP, especially Jayaprakash Narayan,
viewed that the communists with their 'ready' party machinery would
galvanise masses in the countryside effectively that could fulfil the
social and political objectives of the CSP; and that it could pose a
direct challenge to the RW without delay. Considering the apparent
contradictions in perception and tactics between the CSP and the CPI,
the latter guided almost totally by the Comintern line, mulled over by
an influential leader like Jayaprakash Narayan, it was clear that the
relationship between two partners of the LW would be contentious.

With the formation of the CSP the political battle between the
two blocs began. The CSP stance was to decidedly oppose a brand
of swarajist politics that would peter out into an 'outright drift to
constitutionalism' at a time when a more vibrant form of political
activity seemed possible. A proof of CSP's dislike for the 'swarajists'
was evident with Masani registering the 'socialist' viewpoint at the
Ranchi conference of the swarajists. Indeed the new brand' of
swarajist politics criticised by the CSP for its lack of dynamism was a
direct fallout of the disinclination of the Congress leadership to push
ahead with a more 'comprehensive' ideology of programme and action.
The heat of the new leftist challenge now appeared to threaten the
Congress political 'caucus' led by RW and 'moderates' like Gandhi.
The strong presence of leading industrialists, never comfortable with
'radical' politics, in a common front against a growing challenge from
the Left played an important part in the formation of the Congress
'right'.

[^/3]: Sumit Sarkar, _Modern India_, p. 333; David Laushey, _Bengal Terrorism and the
Marxist Left: Aspects of Regional Nationalism in India 1905--42_ (Calcutta, 1975), p. 118;
Christopher Jaffrelot, _India's Silent Revolution_ (New Delhi: Permanent Black, 2003),
pp. 256--7; Narendra Deva, _Socialism and National Revolution_, pp. 4,5,9.

The reaction of the RW towards the CSP was sharp. Patel
immediately after his release from detention branded the socialist
ideology 'as nonsense and that it would not be allowed to work'.
Sitaramayya's apparent dislike of the CSP, describing its founders as
'scum' in a letter to Patel on 21 September 1934, more or less conveyed
the sentiments of the Congress RW. Earlier the Congress Working
Committee (WC) in June 1934 dominated by the RW condemned the
'loose talk about property confiscation and class war as opposed to
non violence'. In August 1934 Gandhi stated that Acharya Narendra
Dev's call for a general strike of workers and peasants would be too
'intoxicating and dangerous'. Expressing his 'reservations' about the
new party, CSP, Jawaharlal Nehru wrote, 'so far as I have gathered,
its general policy was agreeable to me, but it seemed a curious and
mixed assemblage', and 'even if I had been completely free, I would
not have suddenly joined it' The other emerging left-nationalist,
Subhas Chandra Bose, more or less conveyed similar observations,
lauding its (CSP) efforts to generate a 'radical tendency' in the
national movement. Nehru's personal opinion about the CSP did not
assume importance for its leadership but his 'partial commitment
to Marxian socialist ideas', of blending nationalist objectives with
radical programmes for social regeneration and economic progress
gave enough reason to the CSP-led LW to rally under his Presidentship
at Lucknow (1936) and Faizpur (1937). Gandhi was not particularly
alarmed by Nehru's fascination with Marxism. 'His (Jawaharlal
Nehru) communist views need not frighten anyone', said Gandhi. In a
letter written to Narendra Dev on 2 August 1934, Gandhi confessed
his preference for Jawaharlal Nehru in unmistakable terms, 'as the
natural wearer of the Congress crown of thorns when I and other
elderly men and women retire',[^/4] a point he repeated for Patel's benefit
shortly thereafter. On a personal note Nehru was distraught at the
way the civil disobedience movement was 'handled' by Gandhi. Yet he
avoided a direct breach of faith from Gandhi. A month after the civil
disobedience movement was officially called off (July 1934) Nehru
wrote a letter to Gandhi on 14 August 1934, expressing the failure
of the civil disobedience movement 'as the biggest shock, under which
he felt absolutely alone ... It was a spiritual defeat which is the most
terrible of all'. And further, the unfortunate 'prominence of those who
had ... cooperated with anti-revolutionary elements'. Nehru further
stated the need to discover the 'revolutionary' middle class that had
always provided the backbone of the national movement. It was during
this period that he was showing support for organizations such as
the CSP to make Congress realistically a broad-based organization.
Gandhi's response was prompt, asking Nehru if he could be allowed
to propose his (Nehru) name for the 'crown of thorns', and take with
him 'such old colleagues as would go with (him) 'wholeheartedly.'
Gandhi assured Nehru that 'they will not resist you, even though they
may not be able to follow you.' In Europe, in 1935, Nehru stated that
he would 'not obstruct council entry', but would not agree to 'office
acceptance', and talked of the need to bring Gandhi back' to carry
forward the legacy of the civil disobedience movement. Back from
Europe Nehru became the President of the Congress at Lucknow,
in April 1936. Gandhi's support for Nehru as the unquestioned
leader of Congress of the future gave clear indication to the RW
to end political speculation and doubts over Nehru's candidature; as it
confirmed that Gandhi as the 'dictator' of Congress nationalism could
influence his 'protégé' to temper his intended objectives within well
founded parameters of Congress politics. To the CSP it was now a
question of how far it could, under Nehru's Presidentship, 'radicalise'
and implement social and economic policies of the Congress. Birla's
personal opinion about Jawaharlal Nehru assumes prominence here.
Writing to Thakurdas, he remarked: 'Jawaharlalji seems to be like a
typical English democrat ... out for giving expression to his ideology,
but he realises that action is impossible and so he does not press for
it ... things are moving in the right direction.' Thakurdas' reply was
a confirmation. 'I never had any doubt about the _bonafides_ of J, only I
feel that a good deal of nursing will have to be done to keep J on the
right rails all through'.[^/5] Despite a fair assessment of Nehru, the RW
was circumspect about Nehru's political intentions as President of the
INC in successive sessions.

[^/4]: Gandhi's confidence in Nehru's leadership was vindicated by the events leading
to the acceptance of Dominion status by Nehru, the advocate of independence, at
the Calcutta session of the INC held in December 1928. Gandhi had suggested to
Nehru on that occasion that he '... (had) made revolution while others have shouted
revolutions. When ... you really are serious ... come to me and I shall then show
you how a revolution is made'.

Echoing the sentiments of 'Marxists' all over the country at
Lucknow, April 1936, Nehru said: 'I see no way of ending poverty, the
vast unemployment, the degradation and the subjugation of the Indian
people except through socialism'. Declaring that office acceptance[^/6]
ran contrary to the Congress stand, Nehru clearly expressed the
'marked differences' in the outlook of the 'socialist' President and
majority of the 'old' Congress political leadership. Nehru also stated
that while 'revolutionary leadership had always emerged from the
middle class intellectuals ... there were persons having alliance with
the upper groups ... distract (ing) the leadership ... holding back when
a forward move was called for'. Interestingly, Nehru desired not a
change in leadership, that is, 'alternative leadership', but a leadership
that drew inspiration from the masses.

At Lucknow two resolutions were accommodated in the existing
scheme of things --- 'Mass contact', that is, the demand for 'functional
representation' to be provided in the Congress constitution for the
'organizations of peasants', accelerated by the formation of the All
India Kisan Sabha (AIKS) and workers, and 'Agrarian Programme'
including a 'Draft Election Manifesto' of the Congress emphasizing
the economic problems and the radical measures to be proposed by
Congress. N. G. Ranga, while differing from other prominent members
of the CSP, considered that an 'alliance based upon functional
representation between the Congress and AIKS' would be a great
boon. Considering that a third of the documents were given to a
discussion of the 'economic question' it was considered a 'victory' for
the Left.

[^/5]: Sumit Sarkar, _Modern India_, pp. 332, 333, 345--6; Jawaharlal Nehru, _An
Autobiography_ (Reprint New Delhi, 1980), pp. 563--4; Subhas Bose, _The Indian Struggle:
1920--34_. (Calcutta, 1948), pp. 371--2; B. B. Misra, _The Indian Political Parties_, (Delhi:
OUP, 1976), pp. 307, 9, 10.

[^/6]: Nehru's Presidential speech at Lucknow 1936 vindicated the stand taken by
the socialists to reject the _Government of India Act 1935_. The demand was for
Constituent Assembly based on universal franchise. An 'imposed' constitution that
does not recognise either economic or political future of the people or the sovereignty
of the people cannot be accepted.

    Source: I. A. R., 1936, Vol. I, p. 249.

Almost immediately after the Lucknow Congress Kripalani dealt
the first salvo at the Left, characterizing them as 'self-constituted
leaders of the revolutionary script who want to instill this spirit in
all and sundry, not excluding members of the Working Committee'.[^/7]
A comment that was rather meekly protested by the CSP and the
Congress President. Thereafter, Nehru found that even some of
his minor proposals were being 'viewed with suspicion' by his old
colleagues. Anticipating a schism in the Congress Working Committee
(CWC) Jawaharlal Nehru wrote on 3 May 1936 of an 'impending
tug-of-war in India between rival ideologies'. He further stated that
some of his colleagues 'have not taken the trouble to think and
study and have remained vaguely where they were'. At the Wardha
CWC meeting held in June 1936, seven members of the 'old guard'
submitted their resignations protesting against Nehru's ideological
alignment with socialists as a mark of disapproval of the latter's
continuous campaign against the 'old' leadership. The Gandhians
amongst them made no bones about the fact that Nehru's advocacy
of socialism would adversely affect Congress election prospects. The
'split' however was short-lived, but when it came to the LW, particularly
CSP was nervous about its consequences. Nehru wrote a long letter
to Gandhi. He outlined that there was indeed 'no conflict' in his
approach and in anything the Congress was doing. Gandhi wrote
back, '... you complain of them having called that your activities were
harmful ... That is not to say you were harmful ... They know that you
cannot be dispensed with. And so they wanted to give way.'

At the Faizpur Conference (1937) a broad 'anti-imperialist' front
between the LW and the Congress was mooted to ensure that Congress
stayed on course towards a path of 'uncompromising struggle'. Office
acceptance under the new constitution (1935) was strongly opposed
by the LW. But while rejecting the Constitution as unsatisfactory
the Congress in its official resolutions, however, remained silent on
the question of office acceptance. The Congress indeed rejected the
'federal scheme' of the Act of 1935 and decided after considerable
hesitation to take part in the provincial elections. The LW fell in line
suggesting that elections would link up legislative activities within the
councils with mass movement outside, but not before Jayaprakash
Narayan tabled a 'Left Amendment' demanding total rejection of
office which was defeated by 138 votes to 78. The defeat of the 'Left
Amendment' was hailed as a 'victory' by Birla for the RW of Congress
in a letter written to Lord Linlithgow's Private Secretary. 'Without
having any illusion of bettering existing laws', the LW argued the need
to 'explain to the voters' the unrepresentative character of the Act of
1935 and further that the Congress was the only 'anti-imperialist body'
contesting the elections and 'to it we must give our votes.' Election
strategy[^/8] was finalized by the CSP, intended to assist the Congress to
take part in provincial elections, and a 'tactical measure' to approach
large numbers of people, both Hindus and Muslims, apprising them
of revolutionary tactics was adopted. Collective affiliation, another
'tactical' manoeuvre adopted at Faizpur (1937) through LW support,
after a heated political debate, was expected to give substantial
leverage to LW in the affairs of the Congress; that would help them to
radicalise the Congress rank and file for exerting continuous pressure
on the Congress leadership.

[^/7]: The Working Committee consisted of 3 socialists and 11 members of the 'Old
Guard'.

Enthused by the 'growing success' of the LW, Jayaprakash Narayan
said at the Faizpur Congress that the '... Right is still the stronger
wing. But Faizpur put an end to its aggression and I have little doubt
that henceforth the Left will steadily grow till it comes to dominate
the Congress'. And so apparently was the reaction of the Royists. Roy,
released in November 1936, wrote that the Faizpur session was a
turning point in the history of the Congress 'because of its inclusion
in its resolutions of revolutionary ideas'.

Yet as events proved later, Faizpur Congress was rather the
beginning of the aggression of the Right, not the end. Nehru's
Presidential address at Faizpur (unlike Lucknow) fell distinctly short
of offering the LW lead for nationalist-revolutionary struggle in India.
Neither did he seek to align 'socialist' struggle to the national struggle.

[^/8]: The CSP's call for a strike side by side with the election campaign on April 1, 1937,
endorsed by Jawaharlal Nehru through a 'Presidential Circular' urging trade unions,
merchants associations, peasant unions, students associations to join the strike, and
further 'that the strike should be complete and militant'. The call for a strike was
'well received' in large parts of the country but was not enthusiastically responded
to in Bombay, the main centre of Indian business. Lukewarm attitude of Congress
leaders also contributed to it. The British government also did not attach importance
to the proposed strike as the INC was not part of it.

    Source: Government of India, Home Department, File --- F. N. 4/6/37-Poll, 1937,
    Circular by Jawaharlal Nehru, the President of Indian National Congress;
    Government of India, Home Department, File --- F. N. 4/6/37-Poll, 1937, Mr. Hands'
    note to R. M. Maxwell on March 6, 1937, Times of India, April 3, 1937.

The Mass Contact Committee set up at the Lucknow Congress to
report at the next Congress session (at Faizpur) 'predictably failed' to
make concrete recommendations, bogged down in arguments over the
CSP's proposal for 'collective representation'. The Congress political
leadership adopted the tactics of delaying a decision and avoiding
discussion on the question of collective affiliation by circulating a
questionnaire prepared by the Mass Contact Sub-Committee of the
Congress to district committees with instructions to send their answers
to the respective provincial committees. The questionnaire suggested

> ... that Congress will be strengthened by giving special representation
on Congress Committees to certain sections of the nation (workers and
peasants) on their class basis. It is contended on the other hand that this will
weaken the Congress and it will emphasise class antagonism in a national
organisation.

The questionnaire framed was a clever manipulation of the intended
objectives of 'collective affiliation'. The Congress RW had yet again
succeeded in dissipating a potential political threat from the LW.

The process of ascertaining opinion invariably involved delay and by
the third week of August 1937, when the Draft Election Manifesto
was being considered at Bombay, election fever had caught on
with the Congress relegating considerations of other organisational
innovations to a secondary place. Even by the second week of August
the Ahmedabad District Congress Committee presided over by Sardar
Patel and the Bihar Provincial Congress Committee under Rajendra
Prasad rejected the 'Collective Affiliation doctrine'.[^/9] The Gujarat
Provincial Congress Committee categorically stated that it would
'accentuate class struggle and raise a class war as is presumably
intended by the section (LW) making this suggestion'. The Uttar
Pradesh Provincial Congress Committee under Nehru along with
Narendra Dev and Kidwai gave conditional acceptance whereby
the total number of delegates from one province should not have
more than 25% of representatives from trade unions, AIKS, and
other class organisations. The related question of changes in the
Congress constitution, another CSP proposal, also could not be
decided upon at Faizpur.[^/10] Birla had correctly prophesied that election
would indeed take place, controlled by the 'Vallabhbhai group' and
'if Lord Linlithgow handles the situation properly there is every
likelihood of Congressmen coming to office'. Office acceptance would
be conditional, subject to the satisfaction of the leader of the Congress
assembly party of a province that the Governor would not use his
special power.[^/11]

[^/9]: The Faizpur thesis says that the 'transformation' of the Congress into a 'wide
national front against imperialism' through collective affiliation was bound to change
the entire structure and leadership of the Congress which will be 'composed of
the strongly welded alliance of the various anti-imperialist classes, organised and
unorganised consolidation of socialist forces'.

    Source: P. L. Lakhanpal, _History of the Congress Socialist Party_ (Lahore, 1946), p. 148.

The sweeping electoral success of the Congress in 6 out of 11
provinces of British India 'enhanced the prestige' of the Left forces. It
was generally believed that the magnitude of Congress victory could
have been even better had the election campaign been organised
with greater courage and vision. Election analysis by Dr Ashraf and
the CPI attributed the sweeping success of the Congress candidates
to the incorporation in the manifesto of 'economic appeals to the
peasantry' which though not made on clear 'class lines', turned
the election in agricultural districts into 'landlord versus peasantry'
confrontations. The CSP felt that an economic orientation to the anti-imperialist
programme would bring the masses in greater numbers
to the Congress fold.[^/12] With the subsequent formation of ministries,
mass contact and collective affiliation questions were permanently
shelved.

In July 1937, the 'Congress Socialist', the official journal of the CSP
commenting on the Working Committee's decision to accept offices
wrote: 'We desire to maintain unity in the Congress ranks' underlying
the commitment of the LW not to weaken the national liberation
movement. However, the journal further observed: '... unity that
does not develop our struggle would not be worth preserving'. CSP
had realized that in reality its commitment to the 'unity' of national
struggle had strengthened the RW; and that it was necessary to follow
another course of political action. The LW would act as a 'democratic'
opposition to Congress ministries, to carry out sustained political
activity to bring forth authenticity to its radical social and economic
policies. In the aftermath of the provincial elections, activities were
to be concentrated in two directions: strong and persistent criticism
of ministers and Congress political leadership, and 'field' activities,
such as organisation of _Kisan morchas_ (peasant protest rallies), Kisan
conferences, labour rallies etc. During the latter half of 1937, the CSP
maintained their criticism of 'repression of the left', compromise with
vested interests, 'constitutionalist' mentality pervading the leadership
of the INC, and non-fulfilment of election pledges. The CPI did
not differ radically from the CSP though they concentrated entirely
on field activities. Mass pressure and mass support from outside
was to be rallied for exerting pressure on Congress governments'
programme implementation. Greater stress was to be laid on measures
related to peasantry, civil liberties and the worker's right to strike
and picket. Roy differed, arguing the need to transform 'offices' to
serve a 'revolutionary' purpose. He suggested activisation of Congress
primary committees, enrolment of new members etc.

[^/10]: Paul. F. Power (ed.), _The Meaning of Gandhi_ (USA: The University of Hawaii
Press, 1971), p. 2; Jawaharlal Nehru, India and the World, Presidential Address at
the Lucknow Congress, 1936, pp. 77--8; R. Sisson and S. Wolpert (eds), _Congress and
Indian Nationalism: The Pre-Independence Phase_ (Delhi: OUP 1988), p. 142; Report, Third
Conference of the All India Congress Socialist Party (AICSP) (Faizpur, 1936), p. 146;
Jayaprakash Narayan, 'Notes on the Faizpur Congress', in _Towards Struggle_ (Bombay, 1946), p. 193; M. N. Roy, 'The Confession of a Monopolist', in _Our Problem_ (Calcutta, 1938), p. 66; N. N. Rajkumar, _Indian Political Parties_ (Delhi, 1948), p. 62; General
Secretary's Report, AICSP, p. 51; Asoka Mehta, _Forgotten Fields_, p. 67; N. N. Mitra, IAR,
1936, Vol. I, p. 31; Jayaprakash Narayan Papers --- T.L No. 214/1935--52, IAR, Vol. II,
1936, p. 36; _The Hindu_, Delhi, July 15, 1936; Editorial, _Congress Socialist_, Vol. II, No.
27, July 10, 1939, p. 5, N. N. Mitra, IAR, 1936, p. 36.

[^/11]: Sumit Sarkar, _Modern India_, pp. 348--50.

[^/12]: House of Commons, Parliamentary Debates, Official Report, Fifth Series,
Session 1936--37, Vol. 321. Col. 809--10, March 8, 1937; _Congress Socialist_, Vol. II,
No. 4, January 30, 1937, p. 5; Ben Bradley, 'The Indian Elections', _The Labour Monthly_,
Vol. 19, No. 4, April 1937, pp. 237, 239.


However, LW-inspired political struggle critical of the functioning
of the Congress ministries faced three major crises. First, the question
of 'civil liberty' raised a furore with the arrest of Batlivala and K. Pillai,
member of AICC and a leader of Kerala CSP respectively; second, the
'search' for CSP leader E. M. S. Namboodripad and promulgation of
section 144 in Sholapur on 5 October 1937; and third, the 'Red Flag'
used by the LW in _kisan_ demonstrations and Congress meetings which
became a big point of friction between the 'two wings' of the Congress.

'Red flag' and mass political participation that became synonymous
with political activity of the LW in Congress administered provinces
clearly indicated the steady influence of the CPI within the LW.
At the Lucknow Congress the AIKS was founded by the CSP with
the intention of mobilizing the vast reservoir of humanity, the
Indian peasantry, who lived under extreme human privation in the
countryside. The CSP-led LW intended to use the AIKS to bring mass
pressure on Congress ministries to introduce radical economic policies
to alleviate the condition of the peasantry to complement the national
liberation struggle of the INC; and thereby, to substantially broaden
the political base of the Congress.

The revolutionary/transformatory character of the peasantry was
crucial to the success of the LW. By the May 1938 AIKS session at
Comilla membership had risen to 600,000. But while huge peasant
demonstration at Cuttuck in September 1937; impressive peasant
marches, rallies and conferences throughout 1938--39 that took place
in large parts of the country, especially Berar, Maharashtra, Andhra,
Tamil Nadu and Bengal; and peasant marches involving nearly
1,50,000 _kisans_, especially in Bihar and U.P, notable in August 1937,
and November 1939, had come to produce 'revolutionary effects',
'the communists seized upon this opportunity' to turn this 'creative
weapon' against, what CSP leader N. G. Ranga noted, 'our' Congress
ministries. Did it not indicate that 'our' Congress ministries were not
'theirs', that is, the 'communists'?

Acharya Narendra Deva, President of the fourth session of the AIKS,
Gaya, April 1939, by which time membership had risen by almost 20
lakhs, made an obvious reference to virtual downgrading of Congress
ministers in the eyes of the people by means of _lathi_ (stick) wielding
marching peasants 'due to communist prodding'. Narendra Deva
advised caution to his communist colleagues 'to restrain their desire
to gain predominance over the Congress' while accepting the fact that
'the peasant organization had been practically shattered in the last
three years (1936--39)'. The CPI's methods of 'left sectarianism', of
'militarizing' AIKS by using CSP's 'left unity' platform distorted CSP's
official stand on Congress and the nature of political struggle. CPI's
manipulation of 'LW politics' was also observed in connection with
the Left-inspired Kanpur strike that forced the Congress government
in Uttar Pradesh to promulgate section 144 and set up an Enquiry
Committee. Despite repeated requests by Congress authorities,
urging workers to wait till the Enquiry report was made public, the
labour agitation went on, provoking Jawaharlal Nehru to comment in
scarcely concealed disgust. He said: '\[the\] workers and their leaders.
knew very well that the Congress ministers are friendly to them
and wish to help them in every way. They will injure their cause by
embarrassing them \[the Congress ministries\] and withholding their
cooperation from them'. Thereafter, Jawaharlal Nehru in whom the
CSP found a supporter of peasant and labour cause was no longer keen
to associate with the genuine economic and political objectives of the
LW.

At a meeting in Delhi, September 1938, a resolution on civil liberty
was introduced by Bhulabhai Desai of the RW charging the CSP, CPI
and left-nationalists with propagating falsehood, advocating murder,
arson, looting and 'class war'. The resolution was evocative of a spate
of political incidents that continued to disrupt Congress-administered
provinces.

During this period the first sign of fissures in the LW was
evidenced. In September 1938, M. R. Masani, the CSP leader, got
hold of a secret document of the CPI entitled 'A Plan of Action'
which was published under the name 'Communist Plot against the
Congress Socialist Party'. This document asked the communists
to make 'systematic efforts ... to recruit the advanced elements of
the CSP who begin to accept our line into our own organisation'.
The document also asserted that communist party members were
in a majority in the provinces of Andhra, Tamil Nadu, Orissa,
Bengal and Punjab, and that out of these, Andhra, Tamil Nadu and
Madras were 'entirely under our (CPI) own influence'. Four leading
executive members of the CSP executive, Masani, Patwardhan, Lohia
and Ashok Mehta resigned in 1939 citing 'fundamental differences'
between CSP and CPI. Jayaprakash continued to explore possibilities
of a merger of the 'two parties' on a 'common ideological basis',
provided the CPI gave up the Comintern affiliation. The CPI refused.
Despite strong protests by CSP members demanding the expulsion
of communists as well as members of other parties (such as the
Royists), Jayaprakash's call was for a 'homogenous party' that was
accepted by the National Executive of CSP. He violated the decision
of the executive by allowing eight communists to be included in
the Allahabad Committee of the United Province branch of the
CSP.

It also came to the knowledge of the CSP political leadership that
Roy had secretly instructed his followers to resign from the CSP in
such a 'public manner and at such suitable intervals' so as to give
the impression that the CSP was gradually breaking up. A national
executive of the CSP was convened in which M. R. Masani called.
for immediate expulsion' of Royists. But the national executive,
prevailed over by Jayaprakash Narayan, only issued a note of warning.
The 'notice' failed, as Royists at 'suitable intervals' resigned from
the CSP, especially between April 1937 and August 1937. Directing
his criticism against the Royists Jayaprakash Narayan said: '... every
miserable little party \[felt\] that it alone was the real Marxist party
and that every other party had therefore to be exploited, captured or
destroyed. The Roy group was also a votary of this inflated creed ...'.
A CSP executive circular further contended that 'Roy was attempting
to organise a secret party that will work within the Congress under his
leadership --- split the CSP and 'siphon off the more radical elements
into their secret party'.[^/13]

In the midst of the political disarray in which the LW found itself by
mid-1938, the CSP chose to move towards a less rigorous ideological
unity with the other left-nationalist, Subhas Chandra Bose, President
of the INC at Haripura, 1938.

At Lucknow and Faizpur Nehru's election as President of the
Congress had heightened the political expectation of the LW to
push ahead with a 'radical alternative' to prevailing Congress social
and economic programmes. Under difficult circumstances Bose's
Presidentship at Haripura offered a hopeful recovery to the CSP
from political oblivion; to retain an ideological 'foothold' in the
Congress which, practically speaking, was functioning under the
overall dominance of the RW. If Nehru's choice as President at
Lucknow surprised a substantial cross section of the Congress non-left
leadership, Bose as President at Haripura, nominated by Gandhi, was
resented with strong political reservations by the RW leadership. The
non-left leadership was aware of the political forces Bose represented.
Between 1927 and 1935, until his deportation by the British, Bose's
public opposition to Gandhian forms of struggle was disliked by
Gandhi, and in retrospect was a distinct threat to the RW leadership.
Yet Gandhi's decision to elevate two young Congress leaders on to
the forefront of nationalist politics was guided by a veritable balance
guided partly by a personal opinion of equating the two left-nationalist
on an even keel, and partly by political considerations of the growing
popularity of radical politics among the masses. Gandhi's anathema to
a tenor of politics that he personally considered as incomprehensible
is evident in a statement he made in 1934 after resigning from
Congress. He said that there was 'a growing and vital difference of
outlook between \[him\] and many Congressmen'. But Gandhi made a
comeback, as on previous occasions, in 1936, in an attempt to achieve
a 'compromise with the \[radical\] forces' that were to be reckoned with.
Bose's nomination for Presidentship at Haripura was indeed the tail
end of the political compromise the RW leadership were prepared to
concede to the 'leftist bloc' within the Congress.

[^/13]: Editorial, _Congress Socialist_, Vol II, No. 27, July 10, 1939, p. 5; 'CSP's Reply to the
Royists', _Congress Socialist_, August 28, 1937, pp. 7--8; Jayaprakash Narayan _Socialist
Unity and the Congress Socialist Party_ (Bombay, 1941), pp. 5--6. M. N. Roy, 'The Congress
in Office', in _Our Problems_ (Calcutta, 1938), p. 100; _Congress Socialist_, Vol II, No. 4,
October 9, 1937, p. 15; _Congress Socialist_, Vol II, No. 38, September 25, 1937, p. 13;
Sada Nand Talwar, _Under the Banyan Tree: The Communist Movement in India (1920--64)_,
(New Delhi: Allied Publishers, 1985), p. 189; H. C. Mukherjee, _Congress and the Masses_
(Calcutta, 1945), pp. 128--9, 135; 'Kisan Supplement', _Congress Socialist_, Vol I, No.
18, April 25, 1936, pp. 19, 22, N. G. Ranga, _Revolutionary Peasants_ (New Delhi, 1949),
p. 69; 'The Kisans Organize', _Congress Socialist_, Vol. I, No. 5, January 18, 1936, p. 5,
N. G. Ranga, _Kisan Handbook_ (Madras n.d.), pp. 7--18, 27, 31, N. G. Ranga, _Revolutionary
Peasants_, p. 70, Narendra Deva, _National Revolution_, p. 54.

Subhas Chandra Bose was definitely not a leftist who believed in the
validity of communist principles. His knowledge of the classical works
of Marxism, for instance, Lenin, was fragmentary. The publication of
Bose's book 'The Indian Struggle' in 1934 proposing a synthesis of
communism and fascism alienated the Indian communists from Bose
who felt that his stand was not only wrong but also dangerous. Bose
subsequently revised his earlier version of the idea after he met
the veteran communist R. P. Dutt. Subhas Bose was more at ease
extolling the virtues of De Valera, and especially, Kemal Pasha,[^/14]
for whom he had great regard as a revolutionary, not merely on the
battlefields of Anatolia but also in the field of national reconstruction
bestowed with 'a unique combination of manifold qualities of head
and heart'.[^/15] Bose's predicament about India's short and long term
interests was based on personal insights. It was by no means a 'hard
nosed' assessment of international politics. For instance, 'as long as
he anticipated a settlement with Britain he was ready for compromise
consistent in his idea of India's self esteem and dignity'. Or that
the USSR was 'one among other allies' under certain circumstances.
However, he concluded that if the Axis powers lost, the British would
'stay for a hundred years'. On that premise he proceeded to work for
the 'final struggle for India's liberation'.

Bose had definite political principles that could lead India to
freedom, such as, organise peasants and workers on 'some sort of
a socialist (programme)', adapted to Indian conditions, eradicate
obscurantist practices, organise youth into 'Volunteer Corps' under
strict discipline, organise and associate women with the 'new'
programme, boycott British goods, launch a countrywide propaganda
to propagate the 'new cult' and for organising a new party.[^/16] As
Congress President, once, he had gone on record suggesting a 'forced
march' for the backward people.

[^/14]: Hiren Mukherjee, _Struggle for Freedom_, p. 204; Hari Hara Das, _Netaji Subhas
Chandra Bose: The Great War for Political Emancipation_ (New Delhi: National Publishing
House, 2000), p. 144.

[^/15]: _Crossroads: The Works of Subhas Chandra Bose (1938--40)_, compiled by the Netaji
Research Bureau (Calcutta, 1962), p. 79.

[^/16]: Ganpat Rai, _Famous Speeches and Letters of Subhas Bose_ (Lahore, 1946), pp. 114--15.

The debate over the success of Gandhian methods of mass struggle
left Bose as it did others, confused.[^/17] His first meeting with Gandhi in
1921 at the height of non-cooperation movement 'was an immediate
failure' and it 'set the tenor for future relations between the two'.
Bose had once stated that he had 'not decided against non-violence';
that it could not be the 'central point of entire social activity'; and
that, it was 'one of the proposed forms subject to experiments'. It was
a vital difference between Bose and Gandhi. Bose was disappointed
with Gandhi/Gandhian leadership of the Congress. For instance, at
the Lahore Congress session of 1930 a resolution put forward by
the two left nationalists --- Nehru, who talked of 'full independence',
and Bose, who outlined the need to set up 'a parallel government
organization of workers, peasants, and youths' was defeated. But
Bose became a victim of Congress politics when Gandhi omitted him
and other LW leaders from the CWC for the Karachi session, 1931;
and subsequently won over Nehru to his side, and arguing that 'the
committee should be of one mind and must be passed in its entirety'.
Bose wrote: 'the Mahatma could henceforth proceed with his own
plan without fear of opposition within his cabinet'. Bose was critical of
the way the Gandhi--Irwin Pact of 1931 was signed. He said: '... it is
exceedingly unsatisfactory and highly disappointing. What pains me
most is the consideration that at the time this pact was drawn up
we actually had more strength than would appear from the contents
of the document'.[^/18] Further, in a letter written to Narendra Deva
from Vienna, 1933, with the backdrop of the 'failure' of the civil
disobedience movement Bose, while stressing the need for a 'new
party' within the Congress composed of radical elements, took a 'dig'
at Gandhian techniques of mass struggle categorically stating that the
'principle of maximum suffering for ourselves and minimum suffering
for our opponents could not lead to success'.[^/19]

Despite their ideological differences the CPI supported Bose; and
along with the CSP became partners in Bose's 'Left Consolidation
Committee'.[^/20] The Presidential speech at Haripura (1938) gave a
fair measure to the RW of the forces Bose was representing. Bose was
categorical in stating that 'there \[was\] a lack of clarity in the minds
of many Congressmen as to the role of the Congress in the history of
the national struggle'; resonating an address he made to the All India
Bharat Naujawan Sabha at Karachi on 27 May 1931. It was a critical
view of the role of the non-left leadership of the Congress.

[^/17]: Hiren Mukherjee, _Recalling India's Struggle for Freedom_ (Delhi: Seema Publications, 1983), p. 201.

[^/18]: Ganpat Rai, _Famous Speeches_, pp. 115--16; Hari Hara Das, _Political Emancipation_,
pp. 78--9, 144; Pradip Bose, _Subhas Bose and India Today: Another Tryst with Destiny_
(New Delhi: Deep and Deep Publishers, 1999), p. 162.

[^/19]: Hiren Mukherjee, _Struggle for Freedom_, p. 202; Pradip Bose, _Subhas Bose and India
Today_, p. 168.

[^/20]: Hiren Mukherjee, _Struggle for Freedom_, p. 206.

Further, he noted, that 'organisations such as the _kisan sabhas_ and
trade unions could not be abolished ... by ignoring or condemning
them. ... They exist as objective facts ... there is historical necessity
behind them ... we have to reconcile to their existence'. Third, and
significantly, he talked of consolidation of 'leftist elements' 'into one
party', a 'leftist bloc ... only if it is socialist in character. The role of
the CSP to head a LW group within the Congress was stressed. By
September 1938, with the Second World War hovering over Europe,
Bose was contemplating a 'national struggle, which would synchronise
with the coming war in Europe ... a move that was resented by
Gandhiites who did not want their 'ministerial and parliamentary
work' disturbed and 'who were at that time opposed to any national
struggle'.

Bose extensively toured the country, but despite setting a new
socio-political agenda through his speeches, chose to act 'as Congress
President with studied moderation, permitting himself to be guided,
in the matter of the exercise by Congress representatives of a
certain amount of state power in many Indian provinces by powerful
organisation-men ...' [^/21]

A minor irritant to Bose's Presidentship in 1938 came in the form
of the opposition of Patel to Masani being nominated in place of
Patwardhan as CWC member. Patel, 'against whom Bose had in both
personal and political terms made a bone to pick', alleged that Masani
was in close consort with K. F. Nariman's 'indisciplined activities'
within Congress; a charge that could not be confirmed. However
Jayaprakash Narayan and Bose agreed with Gandhi to not request
a change in the 15 CWC members. The stated displeasure of the 'Old
Guard' to Bose was now evident.

With an eye on furthering the prospects of a radical national
programme, the CPI and the CSP were more than equivocal in
insisting upon his re-election at the next Congress session, at
Tripuri. Bolstered by popular response Subhas decided to stand for
presidentship again.

[^/21]: Subhas Chandra Bose, _Through Congress Eyes_ (Allahabad: Kitabstan, 1938),
pp. 18,43; Hari Hara Das, _Political Emancipation_, p. 149; Hiren Mukherjee, _Struggle for
Freedom_, p. 207.

Congress had for all practical purposes dissociated itself from its
own brand of swarajist legislative politics that had come to dominate
the organisation in the middle years of the 1920s. But a semblance
of it, albeit a slight variation, was all along being followed by the
Congress leadership; a controlled middle-class parameter of 'safe'
politics. The comforting prospect of 'safe' politics that found support
among a diverse social class of Congress leaders, such as industrialists,
the landowning class, Gandhians, and a section of the educated
intelligentsia, was being subjected to severe review by radical left-wing
politics. The Congress was now in no mood to extend the political life
of the LW under the leadership of Subhas Bose.

Bose aware of the inbuilt tension that characterized the relationship
between the two opposing blocs was talking of cooperation. On
17 January 1939 he said: '... the first thing that we need is that all
Congressmen should speak with one voice and think with one will'. His
uncompromising opposition to the 'federal scheme', that was passed
as a 'Main Resolution' in Congress at Haripura, and preparation for
a fight with the government to win swaraj 'inside eighteen months'
was based on his analysis of what might be the British government's
strategy to counter it following his prediction of a 'brewing crisis
among European nations' during this period.[^/22] The outlook of the
Congress leaders at this time was being governed by two ideas: 'to
avoid a bloody revolution ... and ... mass civil disobedience on a scale
hitherto not attempted ...' and to have a 'homogenous' Congress
Working Committee (CWC) in order to avoid artificial combinations
between the Left and the Right, a logical conclusion to Gandhi's 1938
directive to the Congress leadership. It was quite apparent that Bose's
desire to push through with his 'National Demand' in the form of
an ultimatum to the British government would run into difficulties
considering that the existing parameters of Congress politics[^/23] would
be simply unresponsive to the demands of a more radical outlook.

For the better part of a decade the two ideological camps were
locked in a tussle for supremacy within the Congress. Now on its last
leg a bitter end seemed imminent. A fortnight before the presidential
elections Subhas had spoken in no uncertain terms that he had not
received any suggestion or advice from a single delegate asking (him)
to withdraw from the contest. On the contrary, he expressed surprise
that he had 'been nominated as a candidate from several provinces
without (his) knowledge or consent and (he) had been receiving
requests from socialists and non-socialists in different parts of the
country urging (him) not to retire, ... that he should be allowed
to serve in office for another term'. Bose however hastened to add
that he could be wrong in overestimating himself but that 'could be
only verified when voting (took) place on the 29th January and not
earlier'. And further, '(he) shall be failing in (his) duty if he shirked
any responsibility which may be cast on (him)'. Bose added that if,
however, as a result of the 'appeal made by eminent leaders like
Maulana Azad', whose withdrawal from presidentship at Tripuri at
the last moment owing to a combination of weak health and dislike for
publicity precipitated the crisis prompting the Congress leadership to
prop up Sitaramayya, '... the majority of delegates vote against my
re-election, I shall loyally abide by their verdict and shall continue to
serve the Congress and the country as an ordinary soldier ...'[^/24]

[^/22]: Pradip Bose, _Subhas Bose and India Today_, p. 162; Subhas Bose, _The Indian Struggle
(1920--42)_, (Reprint, Calcutta, 1964), pp. 145--6; J. S. Bright (ed.), _Important Speeches
and Writings of Subhas Bose_ (Lahore, 1946), pp. 80--1, 258--9.

[^/23]: M. K. Gandhi, 'The Congress Ministries', _Harijan_, Vol V, No. 23, July 17, 1937;
M. K. Gandhi, 'That Unfortunate Walkout', _Harijan_, Vol IV, No. 36, October 15,
1938; Bright, _Important Speeches_, pp. 258--9.

As the Presidential elections approached, the two sides in a series
of tensely written public statements traded charges, holding the other
responsible for the impasse. Subhas Bose though backed by Left
forces was virtually fighting a lone hand against the RW. By adding
that a presidential contest could and should serve as an occasion to
determine the measure of support given by the countrymen 'to rival
ideas ideologies, problems and programme's' Subhas placed himself
virtually in opposition to the entire Congress leadership. A joint
statement signed by Vallabhai Patel, Rajendra Prasad, Jairamdas
Daulatram, J. B. Kripalani, Jamnalal Bajaj, Shankerrao Deo and
Bhulabhai Desai, all members of the CWC of 1938 said the following,

>Subhas Babu has set a new precedent ... The wisdom of the course adopted
by him can be known only by experience. We have grave doubts about it.
We could have waited for a greater consolidation of Congress ranks, greater
toleration and greater respect for one another's opinion before making the
Congress Presidential election a matter of contest.[^/25]

[^/24]: Sisir Kumar Bose and Sugata Bose, _Netaji; Collected Works_, Volume 10, _Congress
President: Speeches, Articles and Letters_ (January 1938-May 1939) (Delhi, 1995),
pp. 67--8.

[^/25]: _Crossroads_, p. 87; Bose and Bose, _Netaji: Collected Works_, p. 69.

The erstwhile WC members took strong objection to Bose's talk
of 'ideologies, policies and programmes' which they considered
'unnecessary' to the consolidation of the choice of Congress President,
and further added that the policies and programmes of the Congress
are framed by the WC. For the benefit of Bose it was further
clarified in unmistakable terms the position of the President as
that of a Chairman, 'who ... represents and symbolises as under
a constitutional monarchy, the unity and solidarity of the nation'. And
finally, 'Dr Pattabhi is quite fitted for the post ...' Subhas reacted
sharply, blaming the WC members for unfairly 'taking sides in an
organised manner ...'. Subhas expressed surprise at Patel's telegram
to Sarat Chandra Bose on 24 January 1939 which stated that it was
only under 'exceptional circumstances'[^/26] that a President could be reelected.
Subhas cited several instances when an incumbent holding
the highest office has been elected more than once. His brother Sarat
however felt otherwise, and conveyed his view to Patel through a
telegram the same day that 'the coming year would be more critical
and exceptional from every viewpoint'. Presidential elections, Subhas
felt, were never unanimous. If ever it was, it was as became the practice
in the mid-thirties when leftist candidates became Presidents with
support from both Left and Right wings. Bose added that 'under
the new Congress constitution of 1934 which, as he pointed out
to his more illustrious colleagues, had elevated the position of the
President considerably. The President could now nominate his WC.
He was definitely 'not a figurehead and a tool in the hands of the WC'.
Bose alleged that some influential leaders of the Congress RW had
aired in private and in public that they favour a compromise with the
British government over the federal scheme,[^/27] '... during the coming
year'. He went even further to suggest that the 'prospective list of
ministers for the "Federation" cabinet had been already drawn up'.
Consequently a desire to prop up 'a rightist candidate at any cost'.
It therefore became imperative under the present circumstances to
have a President who will be anti-federalist to the 'core of his heart'.
Rajendra Prasad launched a frontal attack: '... why damn others for
their imaginary views when his own views are not crystallised enough
to discard "ifs" ...' Prasad in fact was suggesting the inconsistencies
in Bose's stand. He claimed that Bose had opined that 'if' there is
a struggle we shall offer opposition to contest the elections to the
Federal Legislature even 'if' the Congress policy would be to offer
an uncompromising attitude towards Federation; an assumption that
political struggle is not inevitable. The second 'if' leaves room for
anticipating that the Congress attitude may not after all be one
of uncompromising opposition to the British-sponsored Federation
scheme. Did not Subhas 'impute motives', Prasad stated. Certainly,
the political statement made by Bose appeared vague but was it not the
RW that had gone on record to suggest that there should be 'greater
toleration and greater respect' for one another'.[^/28]

[^/26]: Bose and Bose, _Netaji: Collected Works_, p. 70; Crossroads, p. 88.

[^/27]: _Crossroads_, p. 88, Bose and Bose, _Netaji: Collected Works_, pp. 71--2.

Patel's response was a guarded one. Aware of the unclear stance of
his colleagues he sought to set things right. 'I know of no member (of
the CWC) who wants the "Federation" scheme' of the government,
and then went on to say that no single member, not even the President
for the time being of the Congress can decide on such issues. 'It is
the Congress alone that decides and therefore the WC collectively
when Congress is not in session'. Then why did the RW launch a
campaign against Bose? If the federal question was not a major issue as
Patel's statement indicated, what else could it be? Opposition against
Subhas Bose's candidature mainly arose from the fact that he was an
immensely popular leader who had enthused all, especially the youths
urging them to take an active part in India's freedom struggle. The
'old guard' could hardly conceive of a situation whereby they could
be overwhelmed by a young radical brigade. Understandably, his reelection
would be harmful to the country's cause, read RW's cause.
Jawaharlal Nehru's statement was more cautious and diplomatic
urging Subhas not to contest the elections on the grounds that 'his
(as well as his own) capacity for effective work would be hampered by
holding the office at this stage'.

But the damage had already been done. Bose alleged that the WC
is really controlled by a group within it and that the other members
are there on sufferance. That 'moral pressure' was being brought to
bear upon delegates and the 'RW was going all out to have anybody
else than my humble self'.

Bose was re-elected President (1580 votes to 1377 votes) on socialist
and left-wing support which tipped the balance in his favour. The
defeat of Sitaramayya, backed by Gandhi rankled the RW leadership
of the Congress. Gandhi said bluntly: 'I was decidedly against his reelection
... the defeat is more mine than his' (Sitaramayya), '... I am
nothing if I do not represent definite principles and policy', and finally,
'I rejoice in this defeat'.[^/29] Bose's re-election consequently decided the
course of action or rather inaction that would characterise Gandhi's
involvement in the subsequent days and months. Gandhi made it clear
to the 'minority' within the Congress that '... if they cannot keep pace
with it, they must come out of the Congress not in a spirit of ill-will but
with the deliberate attempt at rendering effective service. They must
abstain where they cannot cooperate'. '... They must not obstruct'.
Gandhi's 'directive' sent mixed signals to the two opposing fronts. For
Subhas who alone represented the aspirations of radical forces for
the moment, the comments acted as a point of demarcation between
the two 'blocs' in the Congress. For the Right it gave them space to
manoeuvre. With Gandhi's 'inactivity' at this crucial juncture the RW
felt free to launch tirades against the LW.

[^/28]: Bose and Bose, _Netaji: Collected Works_, pp. 84, 78; Crossroads, p. 89.

Subhas after his re-election in an effort to start on a right note
stated that no occasion now or in future would warrant the so called
'minority party' to non-cooperate with the so called 'majority party'.
But it was not to be. Almost immediately thereafter twelve members
of the WC resigned headed by Patel, Azad and Prasad. Nehru, though
he did not resign, issued a statement from Almora on 26 January
1939 which led everybody to believe that he had also resigned. Nehru
had suggested to Bose shortly after his re-election at Tripuri that
'we should forget persons and remember only principles and causes';
to which Bose replied that 'you want us to forget only when certain
persons (Bose) are concerned, and not others'. 'When it is a case
of Bose ... you run down personalities and lionize principles'. Nehru
had begun the process of distancing himself from Bose to avoid the
displeasure of Gandhi. Bose recounted later in a letter written to
his wife Emilie Schenkl that 'Pandit Nehru was indifferent'. Another
letter written to Amiya Nath Bose stated clearly that 'had he (Nehru)
been with us or even his neutrality would have given us a majority'.
Bose, then, clearly was conscious of a need for a majority, contradicting
his earlier statements made immediately after his re-election. Bose
continues to write that 'his (Nehru's) open propaganda against me has
done me more harm than the activities of the twelve stalwarts. What
a pity?'

One would in the light of past events predict the 'venerable
patriarch' to intervene, to stave off an impending crisis. Gandhi
was essentially dealing with a man who was passionately committed
to India's freedom. A bit hasty, one who betrayed a sense of
tactlessness, offering 'clear-cut' solutions to India's political and
socio-economic problems. Gandhi's subsequent statements in general
and correspondence with Bose through telegrams and letters bore
unmistakable traces of an attitude he seemed to have developed in the
aftermath of the Tripuri Presidential election---of one that considered
Subhas as an 'annoying interference' in his scheme of things. Though
not literally, but in some measure it lingered on thereafter. Gandhi's
disinterest evidenced in asking Bose to do the 'unimaginable' left
Bose with few choices at a time when he longed for a more cooperative
attitude from Gandhi. But Gandhi chose to be guided by 'events',
occupied with issues which were relatively minor; corruption and
entry of bogus members with the Congress, and the 'Rajkot affair',
which Bose called a 'flea bite',[^/30] urging a comprehensive plan for
simultaneous struggle throughout the country to the present crisis
brewing within the Congress. Perhaps it was Gandhi's own way of
letting the Congress know of other pressing problems which required
'immediate attention'. Such instances gave evidence of Gandhi's
dissociation from the political crisis that was beginning to take
ominous proportions within the Congress. At ease with carrying out
constructive work through devoted selfless service and transforming
genuine social and economic concerns of the masses into programmes
of political action for the Congress, Gandhi achieved a rarity of sorts,
a mass leader who while continuing to shape the contours of Congress
politics remained the quintessential organisational man prepared
to let chosen Congressmen take centre stage. Gandhi's apparent
disinterest at Bose's re-election could not hide his disappointment
at the political overrule of his style of politics by the forces Bose had
come to represent. His continuing indifference to the Tripuri episode
gave additional leverage to the RW.

[^/29]: Bose and Bose, _Netaji: Collected Works_, pp. 78, 80, 83, 85--6;. N. N. Mitra, IAR,
Vol. 1, 1939, pp. 319--20.


The second salvo was dealt to the entire Left contingent in the form
of the 'Pant Resolution'. The resolution requesting the President to
'nominate the WC for the ensuing year in accordance with the wishes
of Gandhi' was moved by Govind Ballabh Pant.[^/31] The Pant resolution
(PR) was 'clearly unconstitutional and ultra vires', as Subhas indicated.
It militated against Article XV of the Congress constitution which
conferred certain powers on the President in appointing the WC. It is
quite clear that the resolution was designed to put political pressure
on Subhas to comply with the wishes of the RW. It became evident
that the 'offended Congress leaders' would leave the Congress if the
resolution was rejected.[^/32] In view of the impending difficulties and
obstacles which he had to contend with Bose reminded Gandhi of an
'advice' tendered at Wardha, 15 February 1939, urging him \[Bose\] to
assert. Would he still advise him to be so? Bose also recounted in the
same correspondence that disagreement with his programme meant
that either he 'efface' himself or stand up for his 'honest conviction'. To
which Gandhi had suggested voluntary acceptance of his (Gandhi's)
view point instead of self-effacement which would in reality mean
self-suppression.[^/33]

[^/30]: Bose and Bose, _Netaji: Collected Works_, pp. 87--89; Sisir Bose and Sugata Bose, _The
Essential Writings of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose_ (Delhi: OUP, 1997) pp. 237--9; Bose and
Bose, _Netaji: Collected Works_, Vol 7, p. 208; Crossroads, p. 113; Bright, _Important Speeches_,
P. 159.

[^/31]: N. N. Mitra, IAR, Vol I, 1939, p. 334.

It was during this period that Subhas was afflicted with a strange
illness that confined him to bed for a number of days. Days
that were extremely crucial to Bose. A face-to-face meeting with
Gandhi at this juncture would possibly have retrieved a deteriorating
situation unfolding within the INC. But his immobility meant that
correspondence had to continue through mail. Strangely though
Gandhi could not find time to meet Subhas. Praying for Subhas'
good health and desire to personally nurse him remained confined
to telegrams and letters.

There was not the slightest hint that the Pant resolution did not have
the personal backing of Gandhi. But as Subhas wrote back to Gandhi
it was being widely reported that a 'telephonic conversation had taken
place between Tripuri and Rajkot'. The air was thick with the rumour
that the resolution had Gandhi's fullest support. For those canvassing
for the PR it had immense 'vote catching value'. Bose expressed
surprise at the delay in sending the details of the resolution to Gandhi
as he found out from the letter he received from Gandhi which further
confirmed that the telephonic conversation could not be taken as a
benchmark for Gandhi's support. Notwithstanding Gandhi's stature
in the Congress and the moral dilemma Bose would suffer should he
fail to 'comply' with the resolution irrespective of the discriminatory
clauses Subhas admitted that he himself 'allowed the resolution to be
moved and discussed'. How could he go back on it?[^/34]

[^/32]: Bright, _Important Speeches_, p. 248; N. N. Mitra, IAR, Vol. I, 1939, P. 334.

[^/33]: Bright, _Important Speeches_, p. 248.

Before the voting on the PR took place Bose had tried to get it
amended, as he later conveyed to Gandhi in one of his letters. An
amended resolution with 'slight changes' not one vote would have
been cast against the resolution and Gandhi's prestige would have
remained intact. But as it turned out, the resolution was intended 'to
avenge the result of the Presidential elections'.[^/35] It contained some
unwarranted comments of the RW who charged the LW of casting
aspersions on them. R. N. Bharadwaj of the CPI, a member of the
AICC speaking on the resolution made an attempt to placate the
Congress and Subhas. 'We are prepared to accept the clause relating
to the WC being formed with the approval of Gandhi but our request
is that the clause relating to "aspersions" should be omitted'.[^/36]

The stance taken by the CPI was ambiguous. In spite of their
previous agreement with CSP leadership to maintain neutrality, one
section led by N. Dutt Mazumdar was reported to have actually voted
against the resolution. The CPI officially maintained that despite
'criticism of Gandhism' Gandhi was the 'greatest mobilizing power' for
the anti-imperialist movement. It was necessary to support Gandhi, to
'weld Gandhism with new nationalism', to resurrect and replenish the
militant anti-imperialist phase of Gandhian leadership during 1919--20. CSP's apparent neutrality over the PR which it carried through in
the voting was a disappointment to Subhas. He said in no uncertain
terms that '... when I talk of our side I exclude the official CSP. We
discovered for the first time at Tripuri what a small following the
official CSP had. Because of its vascillating policy the rank and file
and numerous provincial branches have revolted'. And stated further
that 'a section of the CSP will move with us in future'.[^/37]

Jayaprakash Narayan however clarified that

>the socialists remained neutral because both Pant and Bose had assured
them that the former's resolution did not mean a vote against the latter, they
felt that to oppose the resolution was to face the eventuality of a split in the
Congress.

[^/34]: _Ibid_., pp. 252, 257.

[^/35]: _Ibid_., p. 257.

[^/36]: N. N. Mitra, IAR, Vol I, 1939, p. 333.

[^/37]: P. L. Lakhanpal, Congress Socialist Party (Appendix), p. III; Madhu Limaye,
_Communist Party: Facts and Fiction_ (Hyderabad, 1951), p. 33; Bright, _Important Speeches_,
PP. 255--6.

And further, reiterating a stated position of the CSP Jayaprakash
Narayan said

>We voted for Mr. Subhas Chandra Bose because we preferred him to ...
Dr. Pattabhi. We never expected it would lead to a schism in the Congress.
Our party does not and will not participate in this (P.R.) quarrel.

M. N. Roy took a different line. He moved an amendment expressing
confidence in the President and appealing to Gandhi and all the leaders
of the Congress to extend cooperation to Bose. Roy was advocating a
composite leadership in the first place, but if the Congress leadership
refused cooperation then he would favour an alternative leadership.[^/38]

Personally the resolution did nothing to enhance Gandhi's prestige,
influence and authority, as Subhas wrote to him later: '... 45
votes were cast against 'you' in the Subjects Committee and in the
Open Session. Despite CSP's neutrality, information gathered from
"independent sources" indicated "at least 800 votes, if not more, out
of about 2,200 were cast against you". It is clear that if the CSP had
voted as they did in the Subjects Committee the resolution would have
been defeated. But the PR was passed. It was a 'phyrrhic victory' for
Gandhi, as Subhas would say, 'neither a victory for the Old Guard nor
a defeat for him'.[^/39]

With the resolution passed the problem of forming a new WC
assumed significance. In a letter dated 25 March 1939, addressed
to Gandhi, Subhas sent a number of queries related to the possible
composition of the new WC, an issue that he believed held the
key to a successful unity between the two 'rival blocks' within the
Congress. Bose further stated in the letter that he would be earnestly
waiting for his 'upadesh' (advice) on this matter. The queries essentially
veered around the contention as to whether the 'committee' should
be homogenous or draw sustenance from different parties or groups
within the Congress. If the committee is homogenous in character
which Subhas had opposed, then obviously, as he stated, 'people like
me on one side and Sardar Patel and others on the other could not be on
the same committee'. If different parties and groups be represented
on the WC what would be their numerical representation? Subhas
suggested that the two 'blocs' within the Congress were 'more or less
equally balanced'. To maintain equanimity he would suggest names
of seven members and Patel would do likewise. The general secretary
should be a man of President's choice 'if he is to function properly'.
The treasurer's name may be suggested by Sardar Patel. Thereafter
Subhas' stand noticeably hardened. In his next letter to Gandhi he
posed two alternatives before him. '... either to accommodate our
views with regard to the composition of the WC or to insist on your
views in entirety. In the case of the latter we may come to the parting
of ways'. The inert political atmosphere that had set in within the
Congress was having an effect on Subhas. The indications were quite
clear when he wrote in the same letter that he did not have the
'slightest desire to stick to office'. But he could not be hounded out,
as he disclosed further, that pressure was mounting on him to resign
because he was ill. Subhas retorted back saying 'no President had
resigned while in prison, for instance? He was 'resisting' because his
resignation would mean a parting of ways between the two groups, a
'new phase in Congress politics' which he wanted to avoid.[^/40]

[^/38]: Sada Nand Talwar, _Under the Banyan Tree_, p. 193; B. B. _Sarkar_, _Nationalism and
Marxism: Quest for People and Power_ (New Delhi: Kalinga Publications, 1990), p. 115.

[^/39]: Bright, _Important Speeches_, pp. 257--8,268.

Gandhi's responses to Bose's queries went largely unanswered as
Subhas grappled to come to terms with an increasingly vengeful RW.
While being critical of the PR, he suggested that Subhas should give
it his own interpretation and act accordingly without the slightest
hesitation. That is, form his own cabinet in accordance with his wishes,
formulate his own programme and put it before the AICC for approval,
an approval which Gandhi could not guarantee. Since 'members would
exercise their own judgement'. Further, Gandhi wrote to Subhas that if
'you' 'do not get the vote lead the opposition till you have converted the
majority'.[^/41] Subhas' expectations were belied. Such advice tendered by
Gandhi did not count much as ground realities were far more complex.
His repeated pleas to Gandhi to 'come forward and directly and openly
conduct the affairs of the Congress' met with negative response.[^/42] To
Gandhi 'Rajkot' could not be postponed. Subhas could neither expect
Gandhi to be relieved of his duty 'for ten more days'. Days that were
extremely crucial for Subhas.[^/43]

Irreconciliable differences had made it difficult for what Gandhi
termed 'a meeting of the foes'. 'The gulf is too wide, suspicions too
deep'. 'I see no way of closing the ranks'. And finally in exasperation
he declared: 'the only way seems to me is to recognise the differences
and let each group work in its own manner'.[^/44]

[^/40]: Bright, _Important Speeches_, pp. 246--7, 269, 252, 255.

[^/41]: Bose and Bose, _Netaji: Collected Works_, Vol. 7, p. 144; _The Collected Works of Mahatma
Gandhi_, Volume LXIX (March 1, 1939-July 15, 1939), (New Delhi, 1977), p. 126.

[^/42]: Bright, _Important Speeches_, p. 268.

[^/43]: Bright, _Important Speeches_, p. 271.

It could not be so. It was a recipe for disaster.

Bose had all along been suggesting that in view of the 'critical times
at home and abroad' a composite cabinet was the need of the hour.
CPI which was ambivalent in their attitude towards the PR soon
retraced their steps guided by the Comintern's 7th Congress stand
of an '... anti-imperialist people's front ...' and demanded, not
the exclusive leadership of one wing, but a united leadership under
Gandhi. Gandhi's opposition hinged on the premise that a 'composite'
cabinet was simply out of the question since it violated the moral
conscience of an individual amounting to self-suppression which he
could not permit. Gandhi's moral intonation to the whole argument
was presumably guided by a known fact --- Subhas' stated displeasure
for the Old Guard. Practical considerations, however, convinced Bose
that a composite cabinet would better serve Congress unity. It is worth
noting that in his later correspondence with Gandhi Subhas hardly
mentioned his political and economic emancipation programme.
Could not Gandhi's adamant stand on the 'moral question' take a back
seat for the moment, in the greater interest of the Congress and the
nation? After all, were not practical compromise and accommodation
inherent parts of '_satyagraha_' (a movement based on truth)? On the
other hand, Gandhi suggested that he could stand 'guaranteer' for a
'homogenous cabinet'. It was a strangely unworkable situation.

Failing in his efforts Bose tendered his resignation on 29 April
at the AICC meeting at Calcutta, citing his failure to implement
'Mahatmaji's advice' and urged him to take over the responsibility
vested in him at Tripuri, informally through the controversial Pant
Resolution, and nominate the WC. Jawaharlal Nehru thought the
Congress leadership's uncompromising opposition to Subhas was
unjustified. Nehru wrote: '... he was earnestly striving for a united
functioning of the Congress, ... accepting the Tripuri decisions but
opposition which seemed to me wholly unjustified, came and led to
his resignation'.[^/45] Throughout the period when unsavoury incidents
were unfolding in the Congress, Nehru's 'absence' from the 'scene'
weakened the resolve of the 'fragmented' left bloc. It was during this
period that the two left-nationalists became critical of one another.
Bose contended that Nehru considered him 'more as a speaker than a
directing President'; and declared that 'he (Nehru) has no connections
with the left'. Reacting to his comments Bose appealed to Nehru to
'shake off his present vacillation and give a bold and correct lead to
all the radical and progressive forces in the country'. Further, Bose
dwelling on the Tripuri crisis made a direct attack on Nehru saying:
'what my political opponents (RW leadership) urge, you concede, while
you are almost blind to what could be said against them'.

[^/44]: _Works of Mahatma Gandhi_, p. 125.

[^/45]: Jawaharlal Nehru, _The Unity of India_ (London, 1948), pp. 160--1.

The Tripuri episode, as one Bombay friend recounted to Subhas,
'... was a case of one sick man lying in bed fighting 12 stalwarts of
the Old Guard, Jawaharlal Nehru, though not with the same intensity,
7 Provincial Ministers, who were canvassing for the Old Guard, who
felt that Bose's re-election was concomitant to power slipping out of
their hands and lastly, the name, influence and prestige of Gandhi'.
Bose recalled that the RW were fearful that their 'work of 20 years
was undone in the course of a day', that is, by his re-election at
Tripuri. Subhas further stated that 'since Deshbandhu's time nobody
had given them such a defeat'. However, as Gandhi came to the
'rescue' of the Old Guard opinion amongst the 'centrist', such as, Rafi
Ahmad Kidwai, Sri Prakash, Jawaharlal Nehru and other members of
the Independence for India League wavered. They were prepared to
support the 'left' but 'not prepared to kick out Gandhi', as they said.[^/46]

In the aftermath of the 'Tripuri episode' Jayaprakash Narayan
conceded the failure of the LW. He remarked: '... while a new
leadership has arisen, the predominant leadership is still in the
hands of the Old Guard ... They represent the most influential (force)
in the country. And further, neither the Kisan Sabhas nor the
Trade Union Congress ... can hope to fight imperialism'; it rests
'unquestionably ... to the Congress'. Jayaprakash Narayan concluded.
that the CSP 'should submit to Gandhi's conditions and lend him full
cooperation, since it was Gandhi alone who could launch a struggle'.

Shortly after his resignation Bose founded the Forward Bloc (FB)
on 3 May 1939, a separate left group within the Congress, an attempt
to bring all left-wing groups into a single organisation without forcing
them to merge their distinct political identities to meet, what he
called, 'Right consolidation'. The Forward Bloc's aim was to 'unite
totally radical and anti-imperialist elements within the Congress'.
It was not, as Bose stated, 'his majesty's opposition'; as the present
Congress leadership had, in Bose's view, come to signify. The 'bloc'
stood for something 'positive and dynamic'; that was 'fighting alien
imperialism and Indian counter-revolution'. The RW attacked the
'new party' as one that would lead to disunity and cause a split;
while Jayaprakash Narayan (CSP) and P. C. Joshi (CPI) regarded
the bloc as 'exclusive and sectarian', and not completely an anti-right
bloc. Yet at a conference in Bombay, June 1939, a Left Consolidation
Committee was formed in which three representatives from Forward
Bloc, CSP, CPI, League[^/47] of Radical Congressmen (created during
the Tripuri session), and two prominent leaders of AIKS, Sahajananda
and Ranga, began to evolve a common line of political action. Though
the 'Committee' acted unitedly they were not successful in defeating
two resolutions of the Congress now under control of the RW. One,
prohibiting Congressmen from offering or organising _satyagraha_ 'in
any form' in the Administered Provinces of India without the previous
sanction of the Provincial Congress Committee (PCC). The other,
putting restriction on the 'public discussion' of Congress ministries by
the PCCs. As a mark of protest the Left Consolidation Committee
decided to observe 9 July 1939, as a day of protest against the
resolutions. Rajendra Prasad, the new President, following Subhas'
resignation, had already forewarned the leftists of disciplinary action
should they carry through with their demonstrations. The threat of
disciplinary action brought about breaches in the Left Consolidation
Committee. M. N. Roy, who had stated earlier that 'there will be an
impressive manifestation of protest' changed stance, characterizing
the defying of the ban by Bose and CPI as an 'ill-conceived and
foolhardy action'. In August, disciplinary action was taken against
Subhas. The WC at Wardha, 9--12 August 1939, 'disqualified' him as
President of Bengal PCC for three years. In September 1939 the
Second World War began. In October 1939, the CSP freed itself
from the discipline of the 'Committee'. The apparent withdrawal
of the CSP from the Committee' was due to its unacceptability
with the perception of a 'joint command' being formed by the FB
to carry on anti-war activities. The CSP was of the view that since
'sufficient political unanimity' among left groups was not possible
it was necessary that a 'common programme of war ... (was) to be
carried out by all groups in cooperation of one another', reserving
the right of each group to act individually, and not jointly. The
CSP's proposal was accepted but it chose to withdraw from the
'Committee'. In December 1939, the Forward Bloc suddenly found
that in the official CPI party journal the Forward Bloc was being
characterised as a 'counter-revolutionary organization', and shortly
thereafter, Subhas Bose was called a 'left demagogue'. The Forward
Bloc subsequently severed connections with the CPI. The CPI made a
virulent attack on the CSP, and soon after, an early 1940 document
of the party 'celebrated the demise of the CSP'. They were also
called 'henchmen of Gandhi'. Jayaprakash Narayan and Narendra
Deva agreed that the CPI's attack on the CSP with the advent of
the second world war was an instance calculated to deny any other
party the leadership of an impending revolution, as interpreted by
the CPI. The failure of the 'consolidation committee' and infighting
once again demonstrated the inability of left parties to remain united
in the face of a developing crisis.[^/48] However, the consolidation of
non-left leadership and Gandhians within the Congress continued. In
December 1939, a CWC meeting was held at Wardha that passed
a resolution titled 'Political Situation', endorsed by Gandhi, calling
for an '... independence pledge ... so framed as to help preparation
(for struggle) already on foot'. The old 'Congress Pledge' had a new
paragraph on _khadi_ (hand-spun cotton cloth) and _charkha_,(spinning
wheel) urging Congressmen to pursue it with purpose. The CSP was
critical and felt that the 'Gandhian construction programme', which
it had since its inception opposed, could not at this stage prepare a
national organization like Congress for political freedom. It would be
a strangely unworkable plan. Jayaprakash Narayan commented that
'it (the resolution) showed the helplessness of the national leadership'.
Gandhi replied to these criticisms in 'Harijan' by demanding full
allegiance to his programme if CSP wished to have him as their
leader in the national struggle. He rejected the alternative CSP plan
of students leaving schools and colleges and workers downing tools in
factories.

[^/46]: _Crossroads_, pp. 112, 114; Hari Hara Das, _Political Emancipation_, p. 153; Bose and
Bose, _Essential Writings_, pp. 240, 242.

[^/47]: The 'League' primarily consisted of Congressmen who accepted the Royist
line in Indian politics, more particularly, the political stance M. N. Roy took at
Tripuri. Opposition to 'Gandhian ideology' which was antagonistic to the political
programme, and revolutionary urge of Indian masses was the main objective of the
League. Authoritarian leadership within the Congress was decried, though the League
formally accepted the Congress (national liberation) political programme.

[^/48]: Gene Overstreet and Marshall Windmiller, _Communism in India_ (Berkeley, 1959),
p. 168; Bipan Chandra, _India's Struggle for Independence: 1857--1947_, (New Delhi, 1988),
P. 447; _Independent India_, Vol. 2, No. 26, April 2, 1939, p. 216;B. B. Sarkar, _Nationalism
and Marxism_, pp. 167--8; Sisir Bose and Sugata Bose, _The Alternative Leadership: Subhas
Chandra Bose_ (Speeches, Articles, Statements and Letters, June 1939--4¹), _Netaji
Collected Works_ (New Delhi, OUP 1999), pp. 68--9; Sada Nand Talwar, _Under the Banyan
Tree_, p. 198; _Independent India_, July 9, 1939, Vol. III, No.28, p. 435; _Independent India_,
July 16,1939, Vol. 29, p. 450;. Jayaprakash Narayan, _Socialist Unity and the Congress
Socialist Party_, pp. 30--1; B. B. _Sarkar_, Nationalism and Marxism, pp. 173--5,176; Subhas
Bose, _Indian Struggle_, p. 87; _Independent India_, Vol. 3, No. 27, July 2, 1939, p. 433;
N. N. Mitra, IAR, Vol. II, 1939, p. 2¹3.

Despite a political setback with the dissociation of the CSP, who as
alleged by Bose 'joined forces with Gandhiites to frustrate FB's work',
and the CPI, which considered the Anti-Compromise Conference at
Ramgarh, March 1940, held parallel to the Congress session at the
same venue, as 'neither national nor a struggle ...' Bose went ahead
with the 'Conference' with the FB, Bengal Labour Party and other
smaller affiliates participating in it. At the Conference Bose stated
that '... will India still remain under the thumb of the rightists or
... swing to the left once for all'. At the Ramgarh Congress session
Gandhi openly challenged the LW stating that 'it is not those who
shout civil disobedience can launch civil disobedience ... I feel you
(LW) are not prepared'. He added, '... with me there is no alternative
than non-violence ... I will not have anyone under me who does not
believe in the _charkha_; I shall go ahead only when I am satisfied that
you have faith in _charkha_'. Gandhi's speech at Ramgarh had an effect
on the FB's immediate objective of political struggle. A direct call
was made by FB on 6 April 1940, to 'begin or intensify local (not
national) struggle' in various parts of the country. This 'event' once
again confirmed the unchallenged position of Gandhi as the 'dictator'
of the Indian national movement.

On 9 October 1939, the AICC adopted a resolution endorsing the
WC statement at Wardha on 14 September 1939 on cooperation
with the British in their war efforts in Europe to defeat the forces
of Fascism and Nazism which were considered by the INC as grave
threats to the world; and that they must be defeated. INC's conditional
support was based on the fact that the British must approve concrete
political measures to secure India her future of a 'free nation'. The
CSP was critical of the compromising attitude of the Congress. It
issued two 'War Circulars' on 6 September 1939 showing its keenness
to utilize the war situation for the intensification of the national
struggle. The CSP felt that the war was an imperialist war, whether
it was Britain, Germany, or even, Russia; and further, support for
British war efforts would not necessarily lead to a process of granting
freedom to India. It was not a 'people's war', an obvious reference to
CPI's support for Russia, since a people's war was fought by subject
people for national liberation, or, when they rose in revolt against
the national bourgeoisie. Secured of Congress' cooperation in the war
effort, between March 1940 and April 1940, the colonial government
arrested top leaders of FB, CPI, and CSP snuffing out any likelihood
of an assertion of left-wing forces in the country.

In an article written in the 'Forward Bloc', the official mouthpiece
of the organisation dated 13.4.40, Subhas Bose summed up his
impression about the national struggle. He lamented that '... Hindus
and Muslims \[were\] drifting apart'. The Congress right-wing was '...
attacking the Forward Bloc and All India Kisan Sabha ...' who on their
part were '... endeavouring to carrying on without the help of the
Congress High Command'. The Congress High Command betrayed
a '... attitude of doubt and vascillation which was proving contagious
and demoralising ...'. The Muslim League was more concerned with
communal rather than national problems. And further wrote: '...
India is in a morass today'. '... In the absence of a dynamic leadership
people as a whole seemed to have lost their dynamism'.

It was during this period that Jayaprakash Narayan, who by this time
had 're-oriented his entire thinking', wrote a long 'secret letter' to Bose
from jail outlining his political views that substantially mirrored Bose's
political ideology. He wrote that the Congress 'no longer (remained)
an instrument of revolutionary action and that it was necessary ... to
prepare an independent basis for such action'. He further added that
the

>united offensive of the Indian people against imperialism is at an end; that
a section of the upper strata and middle class are deserting the struggle;
and that a democratic revolution would devolve on the workers, peasants and
lower middle class.

Jayaprakash Narayan also perceived that the 'CSP's framework had
become too inadequate for (this) task'; and the CPI 'could not merge
its identity in another socialist party'. The experience of the CPI's
'capture the union politics' within CSP was a reminder that 'its
professed allegiance to any front should be observed with caution'
since it would get 'an opportunity of entering the other party and
capturing it'.

Bose made one last attempt to rekindle his troubled relationship
with Gandhi. He wrote a letter to Gandhi on 23.12.40 requesting the
FB's desire to 'participate in individual civil disobedience despite its
restricted scope and form'; a thought he shared with his brother,
Sarat, a couple of months before writing to Gandhi expressing
bitter disappointment with Gandhi/Gandhian leadership, wondering
whether 'the British bureaucracy or Gandhi's hierarchy was a menace
to India's political future'. Gandhi wrote back on 29.12.40 stating
that there were 'fundamental differences between (them)', that their
'destination may appear but only appear to be same'. Gandhi was
clearly suggesting that they pursued divergent goals.

Subhas Bose, thereafter, set out to outline his future course of action.
In an article, 'Why I left India', he wrote, '... My object in leaving India
was to supplement from outside the struggle, material and military
whatever may have been its shortfalls going on at home. To morally
convince the countrymen that victory will be ours ...'[^/49]

The decade of the 1930s provided a political opportunity for the
consolidation of left radicalism within the Congress. Yet the 'left bloc'
capitulated to the concerted opposition of the Congress 'Old Guard'.
It ceased to function, or even exist, ideologically, as a critique of the
RW Congress leadership, which, while successfully appropriating the
radical politics of the LW, emerged to give definite political direction
to the course of nationalist politics. A careful analysis of the factors
that contributed to the defeat of 'left' politics during that period needs
to be explored.

The genesis of the 'anti-radical' politics in the Congress lay in the
differentiated social composition of the non-left political leadership ---
the liberals, swarajists, the industrial class, the petty-bourgeoisie semi-feudal
class allied to the industrial lobby, such as the merchants
and traders, Gandhists, modernists and a host of leaders who held
different ideological perceptions --- but all united by their opposition
to radical politics of the Left. Gandhi's remarkable leadership of
the Congress ensured their acquiescence to Congress nationalism,
which, by the 1930s, in addition to the goal of political independence,
was treading a parallel vision of a modern, industrialized India. The
Congress 'Old Guard', at least since mid-1930s, dominated by the
modernists and the industrial class, needed Gandhi's leadership, that
was unquestioned by even a large section of Left leaders of a variety
of ideological hues, and not his social and political visions perceived
as 'anti-modern', based on anti-industrial rhetoric, debunked even by
his protégé Jawaharlal Nehru, an advocate of industrialization of the
economy. Gandhi was 'required' to mobilize a 'passionate, ignorant,
poverty-stricken peasantry' whose trust had to be gained that was
crucial to the crystallization of Congress nationalism. 'Mass politics'
and not 'direct action' as the 'left bloc' in the Congress decidedly opted
would be the appropriate stage to realize the goal of political freedom.

[^/49]: Ganpat Rai, Speeches, pp. 215--16. B. B. _Sarkar_, _Nationalism and Marxism_,
pp. 174--7, 172; B. B. Misra, _Political Parties_, pp. 250--1; Bose and Bose, _The Alternative
Leadership_, pp. 159, 163,165--6,153--5.

Gandhi's method of arousing mass consciousness was based on
'campaigns', his own unique style of popular politics, that could
transform a largely organizational apparatus of the Congress into
a vibrant body of political activity. His method of mass mobilization
did not have the slightest influence of the non-left leadership, but
which, nevertheless, suited the political interests of the Old Guard
in directing the course of national struggle. 'Direct action', that
threatened to substantially alter the contents of Congress politics,
could prove to be incomprehensible with the political goal. Second, it
was believed that such 'un-Congress', rather un-Gandhian politics was
sectoral/sectarian, and therefore could not be allowed to determine
the course of national struggle. Such 'alternative politics', as the LW
pursued within the Congress had to, if at all, conform to the established
paradigm of Congress nationalism.

The Left unity experiment's chief political objectives of radicalizing
Congress policies and infusing socialism by providing an alternative
broad-based platform for Congress' organizational programmes
appeared, in retrospect, as an expansive, vaguely defined paradigm
of political activity for constituent left groups to function.

The CSP, the chief architect of the 'unity experiment' was an
institutional adjunct of the Congress that emerged to 'meet reaction,
and marshal popular forces; to break down the isolation between
the "national" and the "socialist" movement bringing the former
increasingly under socialist leadership'. It was a product of the
'ferment of ideas in the world' that gave legitimacy to Marxism
as a form of politics, as much as a political consequence to the
disappointing pace of nationalist politics during that period. Much
of the criticism that is leveled against the CSP can be attributed
to political naivety that it displayed in the early years. At the
time of its inception the CSP's 'intellectual-turned-political leaders'
had not reached definite ideological conclusions regarding the
aims and objectives of the party. CSP leaders professed varying
strands of Marxism --- Patwardhan had 'supposed(ly) close Gandhian
inclinations', Lohia, 'thought, spoke and argued within the closed
logic of Marxism', Narendra Deva belonged to the school of social
democrats; Masani, 'a Trotskyite' by choice, and Jayaprakash Narayan,
a 'confirmed' Marxist, despite Jayaprakash Narayan's claim that the
'party under (stood) how to apply Marxism in India'. Such diverse
ideological standpoints in 'applying Marxism' necessarily required,
first, a genuine agreement among CSP leaders as to how its political
programmes should be interpreted and subsequently implemented,
and second, thereafter, set the political agenda for constituent left
partners. Since the CSP failed in this endeavour it remained CSP's
priority to remain a forum of progressive political forces 'obsessed
with Left consolidation' to spearhead the 'nationalist left and remain
the vanguard of anti-imperialist army' without a clearly defined
ideology that could outline objectively defined goals. The crucial
role of Jayaprakash Narayan in realizing the potential of the left
alternative of the CSP cannot be underplayed. As one CSP leader
had remarked, 'the CSP was the brain-child of Jayaprakash Narayan,
we let him do what he wanted to do with it'. The statement clearly
indicated Jayaprakash Narayan as the alter ego of the CSP's left
radicalism within the Congress. Jayaprakash Narayan categorically
stated that 'despite different groups of socialists with their (difference)
in methods and tactics there was one type of socialism that had
succeeded, that was Marxism'. A perception that was based on a
simplistic assessment of Stalin's Russia and USSR constitution as the
bedrock of democratic society in the world. He noted further, 'that
the CPI had first introduced socialist ideas into Indian politics'. This
thought eclipsed everything else from the purview of the CSP. The CSP
was then definitely 'under the spell of Marxism yearning for a kinship
with the CPI in the 1930s'. It set the pace for left consolidation, which
in essence, meant unity with the CPI, the major alliance partner.

The organizational encore with the CPI proved disastrous for the
CSP, having far-reaching organizational and political consequences.
The CPI that followed the directives of the 7th Comintern at that
time had no genuine sympathy for the CSP, but was 'keen to merge
it as an integral part of their international line to switch over
from "left sectarianism" (6th Comintern) to the strategy of "front-populaire"
(7th Comintern) like their counterparts in Italy, Germany,
France etc. The CSP leadership, mainly on Jayaprakash Narayan's
insistence, who was trying to fathom a difficult mean between the
CSP's objectives and the radical politics of the CPI, 'opened the
doors of the national executive of the party wide open to the CPI'.
Central, as well as, state level communists became office bearers of
the CSP. In due course the CPI captured important posts of the Kisan
Sabha in certain provinces, wrecking its organization, even as the
leadership of the peasants went into the hands of the CPI. It was a
testimony to the fact that while the CPI sought a united anti-colonial
movement under the Congress, operating as a constituent partner
of the left bloc within the Congress, it pursued, to the detriment of
the LW, 'parallel-sectoral mobilization' of workers and peasants, still
adhering, though informally, to the 6th Comintern. Even the 'united
leadership strategy' under Gandhi, in the years leading into the second
world war, was a consequence of their increasing concern for the
USSR. Thus the CPI interpreted the domestic/international political
situation independently, according to its own perception, and acted
decisively, irrespective of the consequences for the solidarity of the LW
in Congress. By advocating and ceaselessly working for unity with the
communists, in spite of their latent hostility to the national movement
during the period of 'left unity', the CSP was instrumental in 'blurring
the lines of demarcation and division between a socialism allied to
nationalism and working "inward" and a socialism professing faith in
(an). ... internationalism and looking "outward" to the Comintern for
inspiration'.

The other left alliance partner, M. N. Roy and the Royists, proved
to be an equally difficult political relationship for the CSP. The
Royists joined the left bloc in November 1936, and thereafter, started
distancing themselves from 'left solidarity', a fact that was exploited
by the RW as a counterpoise against CSP in local elections. Unlike
the CPI whose 'militant' political actions weakened the credentials of
the LW, the Royists under M. N. Roy questioned, and fundamentally
differed on methodological aspects --- such as, viewing a lacuna in the
CSP's emphasis on 'freedom struggle' and 'socialism'; disagreeing with
the socialist programme of radicalizing Congress through collective
affiliation of trade unions and _kisan_ sabhas; and further, that socialism
could only be carried out by a 'revolutionary party of the proletariat',
and that the Indian peasantry could not be organized for revolution.[^/50]
Such liberty to observe widely differing positions on crucial issues
confirmed, one, that the CSP's 'left unity' was, in essence, a 'forum'
for left parties and groups, not to merge into a cohesive ideological
political bloc, but to retain their distinct political identity. Two, that
during the entire course of the left experiment the CSP was principally
opposed to the idea of forming a 'socialist party' within, or outside the
Congress that it felt could have compromised the national struggle,
but which in reality could have probably stemmed the diversity and
contradiction in left unity.

[^/50]: Partha Chatterjee, _Nationalist Thought and the Colonial World: A Derivative Discourse_
(Delhi: OUP, 1986) p. 152; Narendra Deva, Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay, Achyut
Patwardhan, Ashok Mehta, _Draft Thesis for the Fourth Conference of the CSP_ (Bombay:
State Peoples Press, 1938) p. 2; Madhu Limaye, _Evolution of Socialist Policy_ (Hyderabad:
Chetana Prakashan Ltd, 1952) pp. 1,7,6,3; Jayaprakash Narayan, _Congress Socialist
Tract No. 1, Gandhiji's Leadership and the Congress Socialist Party_ (Bombay: AICSP, State
Peoples Press, 1939); Pradip Bose, _Subhas Bose and India Today_, p. 166; M. N. Roy,
'Socialism and Indian Struggle for Freedom', a lecture delivered at Nagpur under the
auspices of the Students Federation in 1938 included in his book Gandhism, Nationalism,
Socialism, p. 124; Madhu Dandavate, _Evolution of Socialist Policies and Perspectives: 1934--84_ (Bombay: Popular Prakashan, 1986) pp. 3,4;

As part of a larger strategy of popularizing socialist ideas in the
political struggle for freedom the CSP cultivated a close relationship
with two left nationalists --- Nehru and Bose; both enthusiastically
spreading the socialist message to the masses without being quite clear
about its contents. Yet the CSP held different opinions about the two
left nationalist leaders who led the LW within the Congress. Nehru was
valued as a potential socialist ally by the CSP, holding an unchallenged
position as the future political leader in the Congress hierarchy. His
socialist credentials were believed by the CSP expectedly to carry the
message of socialism to the masses, as well as giving a strong socialist
content to the Congress programme. In the case of Bose the CSP was
struck by his consistent stance of radical nationalism. Bose, enthused
by the potential for a political struggle offered clear-cut solutions
to solve India's problems, which entailed organizational, ideological
and attitudinal transformation in the Congress leadership. The CSP
was keen not to give political support to such a 'left alternative' that
it felt could divert from the Congress political struggle. It opted to
remain faithful to the 'unity' of Congress leadership. The less than
cooperative attitude demonstrated by the CSP at Tripuri, and its
subsequent dissociation from Bose's 'Left Consolidation' in FB is a
testimony to the fact.
