India's transition from colonial rule to self-government is too
often presented in terms of constitutional reforms, high level conferences
and political personalities. The historiography of the last years of British
India has been saturated with accounts of the attitudes and utterances
of the politicians and administrators who are presumed to have shaped
India's destiny. Almost entirely ignored are the less spectacular, but
in a different way no less significant, changes in the sphere of labour
relations and management control of the industrial workforce that
accompanied the formal constitutional transfer of power. Neo-Marxist
scholars, especially those attached to a somewhat Eurocentric theory
of underdevelopment, have tended to concentrate their attention on the
enduring strength of western capitalism, despite its changing forms and
requirements, and on its continuing ability to dominate the political
economy of third world countries. In such a schema the national bourgeoisie
is all too often assigned a submissive role, the purblind lackey of
western economic imperialism, and the attainment of independence is
seen as little more than 'flag independence', a convenient substitution
of indirect control for outright imperial rule which meant no serious
diminution of economic supremacy. The day of the multinational corporations
was dawning, and it was (so such a theory seems to run) the
historical function of the governments of the new nation states of the
third world to guarantee them a suitable political and economic
environment in which to flourish --- cheap labour, large markets, vast
profits, no strikes or left-wing revolutions.

While, in the final analysis, it may be true that the continuing
supremacy of western capitalism has been the dominant feature of mid-twentieth
century European decolonization, it would be rash to assume
that the transition from colonialism to self-government was a smooth
one for European businessmen and industrialists in a country like India.
On the contrary, the transitional period was characterized by a series of
minor crises. The European companies at times found it hard to adjust
to the new regime's labour and industrial policies, or found difficulty in
persuading the incoming Congress ministers to espouse their interests
during industrial disputes. For their part, the Congress ministers, even
if they did not subscribe to the socialist objectives sketched by the
resolutions of the 1931 Congress session at Karachi and advocated by
the party's left wing, at least felt some obligation to improve the conditions
and negotiating position of the industrial workers. Congressmen
in office often found themselves torn between the workers, many of whom
had voted for (or in other ways identified themselves with) the Congress
and who often had the partial support of local party organization, and
the industrialists; whose property the ministers felt bound to safeguard,
if necessary by resort to the police, prohibitory orders and the courts,
from attacks by 'aggressive' strikers. That the European companies
generally emerged triumphant from these industrial trials of strength
was often indicative of their skill in exploiting the ambiguities and conflicting
ambitions of the Congress ministers, in playing upon their fear
of revolution from the left, and in urging them to uphold the bias
towards property and 'law and order' which had been such a pronounced
feature of the British regime in India. Ministerial support for
European industrialists was neither automatic nor inevitable; but in the
end the pull of capital was greater than the appeal of labour.

This account of industrial conflict at the Nellikuppam sugar
factory in South Arcot from 1937 to 1939 tries to show how a European-controlled
enterprise --- in this case the giant Parry's organization and its
subsidiary, East India Distilleries and Sugar Factories --- was able to coax
the first Congress ministry to hold office in the Madras Presidency
largely to take its side during a dispute with the factory's workers.
Although the strike at Nellikuppam in April and May 1939 occurred
several years before Indian independence and at a time when the powers
of the provincial ministries were still restricted by the 1935 Government
of India Act, the Nellikuppam story shows how a foreign-controlled
company and an Indian government could come to see mutual interests
in working together to control a section of India's industrial labour
force.

# Government Attitudes to Labour

It is first of all necessary to explain the general character of
government attitudes to industrial labour disputes before 1937 and then
to indicate the extent to which the Madras Congress ministry diverged
from its British predecessors.

To their annoyance and at times dismay, European businessmen
and industrialists in India had never enjoyed the automatic support and
protection of the state to which they felt themselves entitled. Although
the British empire in India had grown out of the trading activities of
the East India Company, by the late nineteenth century there was a
wide gulf between European administrators and European businessmen.
The administrators rarely came from manufacturing or commercial
families in their own country; their public school and
university education blinkered them from the world of trade and industry
and encouraged them to despise it; and once established in a predominantly
agrarian province like Madras they were far more likely to
become experts in land revenue matters or amateur anthropologists of
rural castes and tribes than to develop a specialized appreciation of the
problems of industrial labour. For most administrators, European
businessmen were socially inferior, politically naive, and, in administrative
matters, meddlesome. As much from disinterest, therefore, as from
attachment to the tenets of _laissez-faire_, until the late 1920s the Government
of Madras held that it was not the duty of the state to intervene
in the relations between employers and workers. The government clung
to this policy of non-intervention despite the presidency's experience
of intense labour unrest between 1918 and 1922 and again between
1926 and 1929.

_Laissez-faire_ and general indifference apart, the Madras government
saw political wisdom in remaining aloof from postwar labour disputes.
In January 1919, for example, it decided not to prosecute certain labour
leaders because such a step would "seem definitely to place Government
on the side of the capitalist (and European) and against the labour
(and Indian.)"[^/2] Similarly, in 1921 it opposed the acceptance of rewards
offered to the police by the European management of the Buckingham
and Carnatic Mills in Madras because "local agitators and labour
leaders would say the police were taking sides and working for the
capitalists ..." But if the British hoped that such evasive tactics would
convince the industrial workers of a genuine impartiality they were
mistaken. From 1918 onwards the government was repeatedly drawn
into labour disputes when lockouts and strikes exploded into violence:
these were now law and order problems in British eyes and the police
and magistrates hurriedly intervened, almost invariably to the advantage
of the management. Bitter experiences of strikes broken by police _lathi_
charges and firing soon persuaded industrial workers that the colonial
state, whatever claims might be made on its behalf, was in practice a
close ally of the capitalists.

Gradually and reluctantly, the Madras government shuffled
towards a more interventionist policy. In 1920 a Commissioner of Labour
was appointed, at first merely to inform the government about labour
organization and unrest, later to act as a mediator between workers and
management. The Government of India's Trade Disputes Act of 1929
authorized the creation of _ad hoc_ courts of enquiry to investigate
industrial disputes and conciliation boards to try to find solutions
acceptable to both sides. But, as labour leaders soon complained, the
legislation remained largely inoperative: the onset of the Depression
in 1930 forced a decline in labour agitation --- employment was now even
more precarious than usual and the victimization by employers of known
militants correspondingly easier. The provincial administration was,
anyway, unenthusiastic about the mediatory role assigned to it by the
1929 Act and continued to hope that labour disputes would solve themselves
without government intervention.

As Minister for Industries and Labour in the Congress ministry
which held office in Madras from July 1937 to October 1939, V V Giri
sought to introduce a more energetic and constructive labour policy,
largely by exploiting the opportunities created by existing (but neglected)
legislation. In 1926 the legal status of trade unions in India had been
confirmed by an act of government: Giri was anxious to encourage
further unionization and to persuade employers to recognize workers'
organizations. This would free workers from the persistent fear of
victimization for participation in labour organizations, and, as Giri
explained in the Madras Legislative Assembly in March 1938, recognition
would enable workers to meet employers "to talk business across
the table to redress their grievances and demands." The Minister
believed that the establishment of what he termed "healthy" and "responsible"
trade unions would bring workers and capitalists together as
"partners in industry". Giri was not an advocate of class conflict. On
the contrary, he aimed at the harmonious cooperation of both sides.
Direct action was, he conceded, a legitimate trade union tactic: during
his twenty years as a labour organizer Giri had been involved in many
strikes. But now, as a minister, he felt that strikes should be a very last
resort and even advised a younger generation of labour leaders "to be
strong and tell their comrades that strikes are not desirable."[^/3]

A communique issued by the Government of Madras in October
1937 stated that the ministry would "strongly disapprove of any strike
when all other methods of representation are not exhausted."[^/4] In place
of strikes Giri called for negotiation and conciliation. He urged that
disputes should be settled internally, between the workers and the
management in each factory; but where this failed he felt it the duty of
the state to intervene to work out a satisfactory settlement. Giri did this
informally by touring the province, meeting labour leaders, deputations
of workers, and management representatives, as well as more formally
by directing the Commissioner of Labour to investigate a dispute and
putting into operation the provisions of the 1929 Trade Disputes Act.
During the first 18 months of the ministry several conciliation boards
and courts of enquiry were appointed (usually consisting of a single
investigator, such as a judge or a lawyer) to examine evidence submitted
by both sides in a dispute. Giri also hoped --- the life of the ministry
proved too brief for it to be possible --- to introduce new legislation that
would further strengthen the position of trade unions and detail the
procedures to be followed in resolving industrial disputes.

# The Polarization within Congress

Well intentioned though Giri's policy undoubtedly was, it was
too timid for many workers and for more progressive labour leaders.
The advent of the Congress ministry and the appointment for the first
time of a Minister for Labour, especially one so long associated with the
trade union movement, encouraged a belief that the Congress would
introduce a number of substantial reforms, such as improved working
conditions, shorter hours, longer holidays and rest breaks, a living wage,
and security against wrongful dismissals. It was for such objectives,
rather than from nationalist sentiments, that a majority of working class
voters had elected Congressmen to the six seats reserved for trade union
labour in the Madras Legislative Assembly. Moreover, by 1937 trade
and industry in southern India were finally recovering from the effects
of the international Depression. Workers now felt more secure, trade
unions revived, more militant demands were voiced. In particular,
workers wanted the restoration of pay cuts made during the early years
of the Depression and management recognition for their trade unions.
They were at first delighted by Giri's promise to encourage unionisation,
win recognition for the unions, and set up the machinery for the investigation
and resolution of disputes. But the attraction of the new policy
soon palled. It did not bring the transformation of industrial relations
for which many workers hoped, and it was soon being alleged that Giri
was far more sympathetic to the management than to the unions.

The workers' disillusionment was encouraged by the rapid polarization
of the Congress party between its right and left wings. On the
right stood C Rajagopalachari. Before becoming the provincial Premier
in July 1937 Rajagopalachari had made it clear in his public statements
that he had little sympathy for socialism. Once in office, he revealed the
intensity of his opposition to communism, most strikingly in an official
press communique issued in August 1938,[^/5] and his profound dislike of
the trade union movement. He disapproved of collective bargaining,
though he accepted that it had become a "necessary evil"; his ministry
would not allow aggressive and obstructive picketing outside factories
during strikes.[^/6] Although Giri held the labour and industries portfolio,
the dominant personality in the ministry was Rajagopalachari --- "Dear
and Respected Rajaji" as Giri once addressed him during the Nellikuppam
crisis[^/7] --- and it was he, as Premier and minister for the police,
who often made the crucial law and order' decisions during a dispute.
As the labour movement intensified during 1938 there was a series of
incidents during which the police arrested, _lathi_ charged and shot
strikers at Coimbatore, Madurai, Chirala and other industrial centres.
Workers and many local Congressmen were shocked that a Congress
ministry should resort to repressive techniques hitherto identified with
British tyranny. But, despite the outcry, Rajagopalachari stood firm.
According to the Minister for Information, the ministry was simply
following the normal procedure that has to be followed by any Government
charged with the maintenance of law and order."

At the other end of the spectrum were Congress Socialists, men
like P Jeevanandam at Nellikuppam, who advised the workers not to
give in to, or even compromise with, the management but to hold out
for the full redress of their grievances. At one level these political
activists were ambitious for a wider struggle, hoping to propel the
industrial proletariat towards action of a more revolutionary kind. At
another, they were interested in embarrassing the ministers and the
established party leadership, so as to demonstrate how little the workers
could expect from Rajagopalachari, Giri and their associates. But the
socialists were also motivated by a genuine concern for India's proletariat
and they were able to articulate the resentment many workers in the
factories felt at the intransigence of their employers and their growing
alienation from the Congress leadership. During the Nellikuppam
struggles both the management and the ministers blamed radicals and
"irresponsible" unionists for "misleading" the workers into strike action
over "rash" and "excessive" demands. But it is hard to accept that the
workers were quite so gullible. Many at Nellikuppam had been involved
in strikes before: they knew the hardships and the risks involved. One
can only conclude that they made a rational assessment of their chances
of winning (with the presumed support of the Congress ministry's new
labour policy) and were sufficiently angry and determined about their
grievances to believe them worth striking for.

In the middle, between the party's diverging left and right, were
many Congressmen who were as yet uncertain where their primary
loyalties lay. Among local party activists, committee men, trade union
leaders and MLAs there were men and women who saw right and wrong
on both sides of the widening political divide and who, in consequence,
generally favoured compromise and moderation. To take just one example
PR K Sarma had been a labour organizer in the Madras Presidency
since the mid-1920s. In 1937 he was elected to the Madras Legislative
Assembly on the Congress ticket for a trade union constituency. As a
Congressman, he openly identified himself with the ministerial party and
its policies. Speaking in the Budget debate in March 1938, for example,
he assured the Assembly that he and the five other labour MLAs were
"always willing to follow the labour policy of the present Government",
and that their loyalty was to the Congress as much as to the trade unions
they represented.[^/9] However, by March 1939, after a year of mounting
conflict between strikers and the police, Sarma was more equivocal. He
praised the ministry for showing greater and more sympathetic interest
in labour than previous ministers and executive councillors had done,
but he felt aggrieved that Rajagopalachari should welcome the employers'
alleged "reasonableness" and "tact" while suggesting that the workers
had been largely to blame for strikes and violence. He deplored the
"unnecessary and even provoking interference of the police" in recent
industrial disputes and condemned the launching of prosecutions against
striking and picketing workers. But it was on a conciliatory note that
Sarma ended his speech: the ministers had, he believed, "been trying
to do their best to help labour", and perhaps "the want of intelligent
cooperation on the part of organizations of workers" was as much to
blame as the "obstinacy of employers" for disputes getting out of
control.[^/10]

One of the 37 labour organizations in which Sarma held honorary
or executive office was a union of workers at Parry's Ranipet works.
Sarma offended many of the workers there during early 1939 by opposing
the amalgamation of all the Parry factory workers into a single
organization (perhaps because he had little chance of controlling the
amalgamated union) and by working with the ministry to try to thwart
strike action. Such was Sarma's unpopularity that on April 24, 1939 the
Ranipet Labour Union passed a resolution of no-confidence in him and
recommended his dismissal as the union's Honorary President.[^/11] Being
an effective labour leader and a loyal Congress MLA were fast becoming
incompatible roles.

# Parry's and the Nellikuppam Workers

There had been a European-run sugar factory at Nellikuppam
since 1845 and a distillery since 1848. In 1897 Parry's set up the East
India Distilleries and Sugar Factories Limited to develop their expanding
sugar based operations, which were further enlarged in 1902 by the
acquisition from Binny's, a rival European giant, of the Deccan Sugar
and Abkhari Company. As managing agents for both these concerns,
Parry's held a virtual monopoly of commercial sugar processing and
distilling in southern India and a solid base for diversification into
confectionery, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, fertilisers and even pottery.[^/12]
Nellikuppam was among Parry's most profitable ventures and one of its
three main factories, the other two being at Ranipet in neighbouring
North Arcot and at Samalkot near Rajahmundry in the Godavari delta.

Despite the factory's rural environs, several miles from the towns
of Cuddalore and Pondicherry, the 1,500 workers employed at Nellikuppam
were not cut off from the mainstream of labour politics in the
province. Like larger industrial centres, the factory had its first taste
of protracted labour unrest at the end of the First World War, and a
union was formed in 1922. In 1928 Nellikuppam workers assisted railwaymen
in obstructing trains near the factory during the South Indian
Railway strike, and were successful in winning a series of important
concessions from their own management.[^/13] In common with labour
organizations elsewhere in the province, the Nellikuppam union fell into
decline after 1928, and it was not until 1936--37 that a revival began. It
was stimulated by the Congress Socialist P Jeevanandam, who visited
Nellikuppam several times in 1936, partly to urge the workers to elect
suitable candidates to the Assembly in the forthcoming provincial elections,
partly to encourage them to form a new, more militant, organization
of their own which would press for concessions from, as he put it,
the worker's capitalist exploiters.[^/14] Jeevanandam's efforts soon bore fruit.
The Nellikuppam Labour Union was revived in mid-1937, armed with a
list of grievances, among them that workers were not given retirement
gratuities however long they had worked for Parry's and that skilled
labourers and artisans at the factory were paid as little as six and a half
to nine annas a day. Workers were also dissatisfied with leave arrangements,
service conditions generally and the punishment meted out 10
them by the management for what they considered minor breaches of
factory regulations.[^/15]

Parry's apparent response to the union's revival was to sack nearly
a hundred men who had been involved in the union and to threaten to
dismiss any others who joined. Following a general meeting of union
members on September 13, 1937, the President, M Ratnam Pillai,
appealed to Giri to intervene to secure the reinstatement of the dismissed
workers and the appointment of a conciliation board to investigate the
workers' grievances. Ratnam Pillai admitted that the union had not yet
been registered under the Trade Unions Act of 1926, but registration
had been applied for.[^/16] Himself a party activist as well as a union
organizer, Ratnam Pillai mobilized the support of local Congress
organizations and persuaded several Congress MLAs to sign a petition
asking Giri to appoint a conciliation board and to persuade Parry's to
re-employ the dismissed men.[^/17] At this stage, then, it was possible for
the workers and unionists at Nellikuppam to invoke the support of the
ministerial party to pressurise Parry's to accept the union and consider
their demands.

There was an element of duplicity in Parry's response. Once Giri
intervened the management promised to reinstate some of the men and
to try to reach a compromise agreement over the worker's grievances.
One could say that Parry's were more anxious to prevent the appointment
of a conciliation board, which would result in the public discussion
of their pay structure, conditions of employment, and perhaps profits,
than to reach a settlement themselves which would amount to only
marginal concessions to the workers. Parry's were now reaping large
profits from their sugar works and, for the sake of a pacified labour
force, were prepared to sacrifice a fraction of their gains. One might also
say that their response to Giri's intervention was essentially a political
exercise, intended as much to impress the ministry and the public
--- Parry's sent a lengthy explanation of their conduct to both Giri and the
press --- as an attempt to appease the workers. By a display of 'reasonableness'
now Parry's might be better placed to win ministerial support
against a more determined challenge at a later date. Parry's also took
the opportunity to advertise their official policy towards unions. Like
most other leading European employers in the province, Parry's had
long since recognized that trade unions had a right to exist and begun
to see that with careful handling they could be very useful to the management.
In this respect European employers were generally more
'progressive' than their Indian counterparts many of whom were still
rigidly opposed to unions operating among their employees. In explaining
his company's attitude to unions in September 1937, Sir William
Wright, Chairman of Parry's Board of Directors, said that recent
attempts to form a union at Nellikuppam had not been opposed by the
management, rather "we have encouraged registration and offered
recognition in order that proper relations might be established." Once
the Nellikuppam Labour Union was properly established, Parry's would
be willing to recognize and negotiate with it. There had, Wright asserted
in contradiction to what the unionists and their supporters had claimed,
been no victimization at the factory. The men dismissed had been laid
off for quite different reasons, not for their membership of the incipient
union.[^/18]

Wright was also an MLA; one of the three elected to represent
European commercial, industrial and planting interests in the provincial
Assembly, and during the March 1938 Budget debates he elaborated on
his view of the role of trade unions. "We have", he said, "no quarrel
with the system of collective bargaining. We recognize that it is a feature
of the industrial world today which has definitely come to stay." Far
from resenting trade unions among their workforce, Parry's and other
European companies welcomed "the existence of such Trade Unions,
properly led, inculcated with a full sense of responsibility and capable
of maintaining discipline among its \[sic\] members." Wright accordingly
approved the ministry's communique on labour relations issued in
October 1937. What he found distressing was not unionism as such but
the recent and increasing "lack of discipline in the ranks of labour
directed not only against their employers but also against their own
Union leaders."[^/19]

What Wright and his European associates sought was basically
a well organized, cohesive trade union within each factory, led by men
who could formulate and relay the grievances of the workers, who would
be willing to discuss these grievances with the management while
dissuading the workers, from striking and who would not invoke outside
political help. From the management's viewpoint it was futile to deal
with 'leaders', only to find an agreement reached with them being
repudiated by the workers they claimed to represent. Equally, the management
did not want to be suddenly confronted by a strike or by some
other labour situation for which they were quite unprepared. Parry's
did not, therefore, want mere stooges and management 'yes --- men'; but
they did require union representatives to be exceptionally patient men.
They should be institutionalized safety valves installed in the factory so
that labour relations would not overheat and explode like a faulty
boiler.

In the language which they used to describe unions and worker--management
relations, Giri and Parry's directors often had much in
common --- the recognition of 'healthy' and 'responsible' trade unions,
negotiation and conciliation in place of strikes, industrial "partnership"
in place of class warfare. Similarity of language can be deceptive, however,
and while Giri was often led to think himself in complete agreement
with Parry's, the latter were in practice pursuing a far more intolerant
policy, seeking all possible excuses not to negotiate with or recognize
a union, for example, or, as we have seen at Nellikuppam, sacking
unionists while claiming that their dismissal had been for quite different
reasons. On only a few occasions did Giri see through this duplicity, and
the workers were often baffled that he should believe so readily the management
interpretation of developments at the factory rather than their
own.

# Towards a Crisis

Labour unrest at Nellikuppam moved into the second of its three
phases --- a phase that was to be inconclusive and unsatisfactory for all the
parties involved. Discontented with the paltry concessions Parry's had
made at the end of 1937 and egged on by Jeevanandam during his
frequent visits, workers at Nellikuppam presented Giri with a new
manifesto of demands when he visited the factory in July 1938, and there
was talk of a strike to force the management to meet the demands. With
the help of members of the South Arcot District Congress Committee,
Giri was able to avert a strike.[^/20] This time Parry's mishandled their side
of the episode. Seeing the union's decision to call off the threatened strike
as an unqualified victory for the management and an "unconditional"
return to work by the men, Parry's rushed into the press an exultant
report of the settlement. Giri at once wrote to Parry's to reprimand
them for misrepresenting the outcome of his intervention: the strike had
been called off only because Giri had promised the workers that their
demands would be investigated, not shelved by the management as
Parry's now seemed to think. This was one occasion when Giri did see
through Parry's duplicity and he made clear his resentment at being
"placed in difficulties for having used my good offices in your favour".[^/21]
From Nellikuppam, C Elphinston immediately wrote to apologize on
behalf of Parry's: the mistake had been made due to the haste of getting
the report to the press. Shrewdly, Parry's manager went on to assure
Giri that such a mistake would not occur again "and may we also express
the hope that we can look for your future interest in our labour problems,
as to a very large extent we appear to wish to attain the same
end."[^/22] Parry's realized that in future they would have to show more
deference towards the Minister for Labour and use more subtly persuasive
tactics to secure his 'good offices'.

# The Third Phase of Unrest

The third and climactic phase of labour unrest at Nellikuppam
took a rather different form from the previous two. Until the end of
1938 the separate unions in Parry's sugar and distillery works had made
little attempt to merge or to coordinate their demands. But as appreciation
of their common grievances grew --- with the encouragement of the
Congress Socialists --- and as workers became more impatient with Parry's
refusal to make more than token concessions, the more radical union
leaders decided to band together for a joint assault on the management.
A conference was held at Nellikuppam on Christmas Day 1938 and it was
followed in February 1939 by the formation of what was rather grandly
called a Federation of Trade Unions for all of Parry's factory workers.
The Federation had a nine member central committee consisting of two
representatives each from Nellikuppam, Ranipet, Samalkot and a small
sugar factory at Thuckalay, near Kanyakumari, plus a President,
G Venkatarayudu. Nellikuppam was represented by Ratnam Pillai and
by P Purushotham, who also acted as Federal Secretary. Their joint
demands were:

1. An annual gratuity of a month's wages for all workers (hitherto a
small gratuity had been paid to workers with more than 15 years'
service);
2. Compassionate allowances of half a month's pay for permanent
workers laid off during the factories' slack season;
3. Sick leave with full pay for workers during long periods of
illness (at present they were allowed only seven days' paid sick leave a
year);
4. Privilege leave with full pay of upto ten days for permanent
workers;
5. Five additional days religious holiday for Christians and
Muslims in addition to the eight granted to all workers;
6. Abolition of the employment of middle men to recruit temporary
additional workers on the grounds that they appropriated half of
the workers' pay.

If Parry's refused to meet these demands, the Federation would hold a
strike affecting all four factories.[^/23]

Mindful of Giri's reproaches the previous August, Parry's made
no direct response to the Federation. Instead they passed the demands,
and responsibility for settling the dispute, on to Giri. They then used all
their powers of persuasion to convince him that the union leaders were
unjustified in threatening a strike, but that if it occurred the government
should intervene to protect Parry's. From the end of February 1939
Parry's carefully built up their case against the Federation and, at the
same time presented arguments why the ministry's own interests were
at stake.

Parry's repeated their willingness to recognize and negotiate with
"responsible" unions in line with the ministry's declared labour policy.
But, said Parry's, the Federation had not been formed according to the
procedure laid down by the 1926 Trade Unions Act; it did not have the
full support of workers at all the factories; and Venkatarayudu, the
President, had no standing since he was not a leader of one of the
existing unions. How could Parry's negotiate with an unregistered,
unrepresentative organization? The management's second argument was
an economic one. A strike during April or May --- the factories' busiest
time --- would have disastrous consequences on the sugar growing _ryots_
and the labourers who cut the cant. During the peak season Nellikuppam
crushed nearly a thousand tons of sugar cane a day: a stoppage would
mean that the 2,500 _ryots_ supplying the factory would lose between them
Rs 10,000 a day and nearly 10,000 field labourers would be thrown out
of work. The government, too, would suffer through loss of revenue. To
make their economic argument even more persuasive --- one might say
coercive --- Parry's announced that from the end of February they would
have to stop receiving cane from the _ryots_ as they could not "risk having
a large quantity of material in process" when the strike started. In
addition, Parry's brought into the arena of discussions the representatives
of the sugar growers and the cane cutters of South Arcot. A third
tactic was to emphasize the political character of the threatened strike
and play upon the ministry's known hostility to communism. On April
26, for example, Parry's forwarded to the Commissioner of Labour a
copy of a notice circulated by the Nellikuppam Labour Union under the
heading "Long live revolution! Down with capitalism! Workers of the
factory, unite!" "We particularly invite your attention", wrote Parry's
in their covering letter, "to the heading of the notice which together
with the contents of the notice, in our opinion, make it clear that the
Union have no genuine complaints against the Management and that
their activities are revolutionary."[^/24]

Finally, fitting their own dispute into the broader context of "the
disturbed state of labour throughout this Presidency", Parry's argued
that the only possible solution was "strong action by Government."
Without being so aggressive as to offend the minister, Parry's let him
know how they thought he should act. "We would urge", they wrote to
Giri on February 22, "that in addition to any measures Government
may see fit to take, and it is clear that immediate steps are necessary,
Government will also see their way to prohibit all further public meetings
within a radius of five miles of our factories, since it is our firm
belief that if our workers are left to themselves and not interfered with
or intimidated they would be only too pleased to work and earn the
wages we are able to pay them." Again, on April 26, Parry's wrote to
the Commissioner of Labour "We assume the District officials are in
close touch with the position, but we would urge upon Government the
advisability of preventing any public meetings in the precincts of our
factories for the time being."[^/25]

# The Strike

The case of the labourers was not so competently or persuasively
handled. The unionists suffered from disagreements among themselves,
especially over the tactics they should follow. Sarma, for example, appeared
before the Commissioner of Labour on February 27 and resolutely
opposed both the Federation and the threatened strike. Subsequently,
Giri met the Federation's Secretary, Purushotham, and was successful
in persuading him to call off the strike. But his withdrawal was repudiated
by Venkatarayudu: the strike was still on. This oscillation merely
served to alienate Giri and made it easier for Parry's to convince him
that Venkatarayudu was only interested in "destructiveness", a view
with which the Commissioner of Labour concurred.[^/26] Although the strike
was eventually called for April 25, it did not begin until the following
day at Ranipet and Nellikuppam and appears not to have affected Thuckalay
at all. Picketing, intensive at Samalkot and Ranipet from the
beginning, was delayed at Nellikuppam until May 6, by which date
Parry's had been successfully running the factory with blackleg labour
for ten days, 150 disappointed strikers had returned to work, the police
were already stationed outside the factory, and victory in the struggle
was almost certain to go to Parry's. A more well timed and co-ordinated
strike might have served the unionists' purposes better than this gallant
but ragged affair.

Before the strike Ratnam Pillai reminded Giri that in a speech in
the Assembly on March 29, 1939 Rajagopalachari had promised that the
police would not intervene in labour disputes if picketers did not obstruct
blacklegs and workers who wished to continue to work and if verbal and
physical violence were not resorted to.[^/27] Ratnam Pillai seems to have
been anxious that the strike at Nellikuppam would proceed along these
lines so as not to offend the ministry. Indeed, he seems to have wanted
little more than a token strike to prove the workers' determination and
to coax the ministry and the local Congress organizations to intervene
and set up a court of enquiry. When picketing began at Nellikuppan at
4:30 am --- the working day started early --- on May 6 the picketers
agreed with the District Magistrate to stand some yards from the factory
gates and not to obstruct those coming to work. However, at 7:15 am
Ratram Pillai arrived with Jaganathan, President of the Ranipet Labour
Union, who had quite different ideas as to how the strike should be run.
He directed the picketers to block the gates and to shout revolutionary
slogans. This was playing into the hands of the strikers' opponents. The
police at once arrested 13 picketers; 24 more later in the day. That evening
Jaganathan made a strong speech to the remaining strikers, urging
them to maintain these aggressive tactics, even if it meant they all went
to prison, and vehemently attacking Rajagopalachari. Early the next
morning the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Cuddalore, responded by
doing precisely what Parry's had hoped for: he ordered Jaganathan to
leave Nellikuppam within six hours and not to return or to make a speech
within a five mile radius of the factory for the next month. In addition
the magistrate prohibited any public meetings, processions or picketing
within five miles of Nellikuppam for two months. When on the morning
of May 7 Jagannathan and Ratnam Pillai defied the orders by leading
a procession of 200 labourers through the bazaar at Nellikuppam,
the leaders were arrested and the rest beaten with _lathis_ by the armed
police. At least 15 more arrests were made that morning and 44 people
were, even by the District Magistrate's account, reported to have received
"minor injuries" in the _lathi_ charge.[^/28]

Although the District Magistrate rescinded the Sub-Divisional
Magistrate's prohibitory orders, such massive intervention by the
magistracy and the armed police almost immediately brought the strike
to an end. It was called off by the union on May 10. No concessions had
been gained: Parry's were triumphant. The most that Giri and local
Congressmen now felt able to do was to intercede with Parry's on behalf
of the erstwhile strikers to try to persuade the management to take
them back. Parry's agreed to do so, but they were in no hurry and
refused to re-employ men whom they claimed had used violence against
the factory manager and his assistants.[^/29]

On the government side of the dispute, Giri found it increasingly
difficult to pursue a constructive and conciliatory course. This was not
merely because of the pressures put on him by Parry's on the one hand
and the workers and unionists on the other. Giri was also under pressure
from S V Ramamurti, the Commissioner of Labour, and from Rajagopalachari,
both of whom were more adamantly opposed to the Federation
and the threatened strike than the Minister for Labour himself. Ramamurti,
one of the most senior Indian members of the Madras ICS cadre
and, so the unionists claimed, the father-in-law of a chemist earning Rs
650 a month at Nellikuppam,[^/30] was brought into the dispute by Giri at
the end of February to assess the justice of the Federation's demands.
On February 27 he met members of the Federation's Committee, as well
as other unionists such as Sarma, spokesmen for Parry's and representatives
of the South Arcot sugar growers. He at once decided that the
Federation was not properly constituted in accordance with the 1926
Trade Unions Act, that the demands were ill-considered in view of the
concessions Parry's had made in the past 18 months, that the strike
threat was "thoroughly irresponsible", and that a stoppage would cause
severe hardship to the cane growers and cutters of South Arcot.[^/31] Ramamurti's
hostile report was not made public until April 6 but Parry's
either knew or guessed its tenor and pestered the Minister for Labour
to let them have a copy "in order that we may be in a better position
to deal with the demands of the strikers ..."[^/32] Perhaps because Giri
thought the report unfair to the workers or because he wanted to maintain
a balance between the two sides, he withheld the report for as long
as he could. Ramamurti, nonetheless, continued to impress on the ministry
his conviction that the Federation was not a properly constituted
body and that any strike it called would be "entirely unjustified." While
he showed little interest in further meetings with the unionists, Ramamurti
met two of Parry's senior management on April 26 and encouraged
them to believe that they could rely on state support to keep their factories
working during a strike.[^/33]

Rajagopalachari, too, favoured a firm line against the Federation.
According to Hilton Brown, the Premier thought federations of trade
unions "contrary to the rules of the game."[^/34] On May 7 he drafted an
extraordinary appeal to the strikers which made it clear that he regarded
them as children or simpletons who had foolishly ignored the sensible
advice of their elders --- Giri and himself --- and now had to be forced to
see reason. The main section of the text ran:

>It grieves me that you persist in the strike. Your case had been
looked into carefully, and the advice Government gave you was in
your best interests. You have been misled by thoughtless men who
persist in keeping you on the wrong path. Your present activities
to keep up the strike amount to a fight carried on against the
Government, against Sri Giri and me rather than against the factory
management. I want you to go back to work at once.[^/35]

Workers who despite recent events, expected the ministry to be sympathetic
to their demands or at least strictly impartial and appoint a court
of enquiry, were understandably furious that the Premier should, as they
saw it, adopt such an offensively chiding and partisan approach.[^/36]

As for Giri himself, he was borne along by events which he could
no longer control. Labour and capital did not seem to want to be reconciled
and he waited for the strike with a grim, unhappy resolution. On
April 29 he issued instructions to the District Magistrate, South Arcot,
to post armed police at Nellikuppam and to have shorthand reporters
available to record any "objectionable" speeches. He also authorized
prohibitory orders under section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code
should the magistrates consider this necessary.[^/37] All that Giri could
finally do once the strike began was to hope that the men would heed
Rajagopalachari's appeal and call off the struggle. Then, he noted on
May 7, "we can use our good offices with the employers and get the men
back to work with the least victimisation."[^/38] There was something
strangely pathetic about the impotence of the position in which the
Minister for Industries and Labour now found himself.

# Conclusion

There are, I would suggest, two main conclusions to be drawn
from the story of labour relations at Nellikuppam between 1937 and 1939.
The first is that in such a situation the European controlled
company did not have the automatic support of the Congress ministry
or immediate access to the coercive powers of the state to discipline its
workers. Parry's learnt from experience that they had to frequently
remind the ministry and publicly profess that they were in general
agreement with its labour policy. They had to appear to be in full
support of the principle of recognition for "responsible" unions, even if
in practice relations with the unions in their own factories were less than
open handed, and to show willingness to trust the ministry by transferring
to it responsibility for solving the dispute. At the same time, Parry's
kept up a steady pressure on the government to reject the Federation's
demands and prevent the strike, when it occurred, from being effective.
This was not the way Giri had wanted the situation to develop. He had
believed in the efficacy of negotiation, conciliation and compromise. But
because of the lack of cohesion and agreement about tactics among the
unionists, because of the pressure from Parry's, the Commissioner of
Labour and the Premier, Giri in the end was pushed from the path of
conciliation onto the precipitous track of repression. In the end Parry's
got the support of the ministry, the magistracy and the police; but they
had to work hard to get it.

The second point that can be made is one concerning theory and
method. It is often revealing to look at class struggles in modern society
not in terms of one class versus another but in terms of a triangular
situation in which the state, or a part of the state apparatus, is also
involved. Of course there can be situations in which the state is openly
and resolutely the defender of one class. But I think that any detailed
investigation of a conflict like that analysed in this essay will show that
the state either aspired to be impartial or tried to pursue a course different
from that of the two contending classes. Engels pointed out that
the state was "a product of society at a certain stage of development; ...
the admission that this society has become entangled in an insoluble
contradiction within itself that it has split into irreconcilable antagonisms
which it is powerless to dispel." To prevent society tearing itself apart
"in fruitless struggle", it was, Engels argued, "necessary to have a power
seemingly standing above society that would alleviate conflict and keep
it within the bounds of 'order'; and this power, arisen out of society
but placing itself above it, and alienating itself more and more from it,
is the state."[^/39] The attitudes and behaviour of the state are not, therefore,
likely to be identical with those of the society's ruling classes, its
dominant economic and political groups. There will be times when the
state will appear to check, even oppose, ruling class aspirations. This
helps to create the appearance of impartiality and enhances the authority
and control of the state, even over the society's suppressed and exploited
classes. Nonetheless, behind that mask of impartiality, despite
the instances of state opposition to the ruling classes, it will be found
that the general bias of the state is to make and maintain laws and a
system of social control which favour the ruling classes and help to
sustain their economic and political supremacy. That, in the final analysis,
is the significance of Parry's double victory at Nellikuppam in 1939.
Not only did they succeed in defeating a strike; they also prevailed on
the state to crush it for them.

[^/1]: Tamil Nadu Archives (hereafter TNA), Letter 63, Public, February 12, 1919,
notes, p. 5.

[^/2]: TNA, G.O. 313, Judicial, June 21, 1921, notes.

[^/3]: _Madras Legislative Assembly Debates_ (hereafter MLAD), VI, March 24, 1938, pp.
713--15; XI, March 28, 1939, pp. 903--5, 935.

[^/4]: _The Hindu_, October 21, 1937.

[^/5]: _The Hindu_, August 10, 1938.

[^/6]: MLAD, VI, March 25, 1938, pp. 785--6; XI. March 28, 1939, pp. 931--3.

[^/7]: Giri to Rajagopalachari, May 7, 1939, TNA, G.O. 1453, Development, June 3
1939, p. 306.

[^/8]: S Ramanathan to Congress Secretary, September 21, 1938, _All India Congress
Committee Papers_, Nehru Memorial Library, PL 3 (i).

[^/9]: MLAD, VI, March 25, 1938, pp. 780--4.

[^/10]: MLAD, XI, March 28, 1939, pp. 921--4.

[^/11]: TNA, G.O. 1453, Development, June 3, 1939, pp. 42--3, 135.

[^/12]: Hilton Brown, _Parry's of Madras_, Madras 19544, pp. 83, 142, 163--5, 202--4.

[^/13]: _Ibid._, p. 274.

[^/14]: TNA, GO, 1748, Public (Confidential), October 3, 1936.

[^/15]: Ratnam Pillai to Giri, September 17, 1937, TNA, G.O. 2795, Development,
December 15, 1937, p. 2.

[^/16]: _Ibid._

[^/17]: _The Hindu_, September 17, 1937.

[^/18]: Wright to Development Secretary, September 27, 1937, TNA, G.O. 2795, Development,
December 15, 1937, pp. 22--3.

[^/19]: MLAD. VI, March 25, 1938, pp. 778--9.

[^/20]: TNA, G.O. 2162, Development, September 2, 1938, pp. 12--13, 24--33.

[^/21]: Giri to C Elphinston, August 24, 1938, _ibid._, pp. 36--7.

[^/22]: Elphinston to Giri, August 25, 1938, _ibid._, pp. 38--9.

[^/23]: TNA, G.O. 1453, Development, June 3, 1939, pp. 5--10, 77--8.

[^/24]: Parry's to Giri, February 22, 1939, _ibid._, pp. 1--4; Parry's to Under-Secretary,
Development, February 24, 1939, _ibid._, pp. 22--3; Parry's to Commissioner of
Labour, April 26, 1939, _ibid._, pp. 125--6.

[^/25]: Parry's to Giri, February 22, 1939, _ibid._, pp. 3--4; Parry's to Commissioner of
Labour, April 26, 1939, _ibid._, p. 126,

[^/26]: Commissioner of Labour to Development Secretary, February 27, 1939, _ibid._, p. 44.

[^/27]: Ratnam Pillai to Giri, telegram, April 26, 1939, _ibid._, p. 144.

[^/28]: District Magistrate, South Arcot, to Chief Secretary, Madras, May 8, 1939, ibid,
pp. 187--93.

[^/29]: _Ibid._, pp. 195--243. The strike at Samalkot continued until May 28, 1939.

[^/30]: For example, _ibid._, pp. 131, 139.

[^/31]: Ramamurti to Development Secretary, February 27, 1939, _ibid._, pp. 38--14.

[^/32]: Parry's to Under-Secretary, Development, March 3, 1939, _ibid._, p. 48.

[^/33]: Ramamurti to Development Secretary, April 26, 1939, _ibid._, pp. 121--2.

[^/34]: Brown, _Parry's_, p. 297.

[^/35]: Rajagopalachari, May 7, 1939, TNA, G.O. 1453, Development, June 3 1939, p. 307.

[^/36]: Secretary, Samalkot Labour Union, May 11, 1939, _ibid._, p. 213.

[^/37]: Giri, April 29, 1939, _ibid._, p. 295.

[^/38]: Giri, May 7, 1939, _ibid._, p. 306.

[^/39]: Frederick Engels, "The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State",
_Selected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels_, III Moscow, 1970, pp. 326--7.
