Maniben Patel, daughter and Secretary of Sardar Vallabhbahi Patel
(1875--1950), was of the view that her father as a "man of few words.
He wrote very little ..." She noted that her father was a "man of action",
averse to writing. His philosophy of life may be summed up in the
words: "why not create history rather than waste time writing it?"[^/1]
Along with Mohandas K. Gandhiji (1869--1948) and Jawaharlal
Nehru (1889--1964), Patel formed the triumvirate which led India's
freedom movement but unlike the other two, Patel wrote very little,
not even his autobiography. So, a lot of Patel's thoughts and actions
are a matter of conjecture, speculation and even distortion.

[^/1]: P.N. Chopra and Prabha Chopra (eds.) _Inside Story of Sardar Patel The Diary of
Maniben Patel: 1936--50_ (New Delhi, Vision Books, 2001), pp. 25 & 32.

Sardar Patel is tragically not considered a hero on the question
of communalism, secularism and even Hindu--Muslim unity. His
contemporaries, like Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad (1888--1958),
thought that he played a devious role after the chance of keeping
India united was lost due to the non-acceptance by Congress of
Cabinet Mission plan (1946). Azad accepted that Patel would have
implemented the Cabinet Mission plan more energetically than
Jawaharlal Nehru but once this opportunity was lost, Azad believed,
Patel became the "the real flag bearer of partition" and deserves to
be called "the founder of Indian partition." He was reported to be
so annoyed with Jinnah's bargaining that "Sardar Patel was 50% in favour of partition even before Lord Mountbatten appeared
on the scene." Patel "was prepared to have a part of India if only he
could get rid of Muslim League." When reminded that to accept
Partition was to accept Jinnah's slogan of two nations, Patel is
reported to have told Azad that "there were two nations in India"
and that even with one's brother it "was better to have one clean
fight and then separate than have bickering every day."[^/2]

[^/2]: Maulana Abul Kalam Azad _India Wins Freedom (The Complete Version)_ (New Delhi,
Orient Longman, 1988),pp. 162, 197--202.

Recently, a reputed scholar questioned the secularism of even
Nehru's Congress and made rather flimsy allegation on Patel. Ian
Copland approvingly quoted the testimony of Harinder Singh that
Patel was "actually a closet supporter of the Sikh ethnic cleansing
project" which targeted Muslims. The Deputy Prime Minister (Patel)
allegedly gave the wayward Sikh ruler of Faridkot (Harinder Singh)
800 rifles in August 1947 to 'defend' the East Punjab and
congratulated Singh on having cleared the Muslims out of his State.
Patel is also reported to have said that national interest would be
best served by a full 'transfer' of the population of Muslims out and
Sikhs/Hindus into Punjab.[^/3]

[^/3]: Ian Copland "The Master and the Maharajas: The Sikh Princes and the East Punjab
Massacres of 1947", _Modern Asian Studies_, 36,3 (July 2002), pp. 703--704.

All this makes Sardar Patel look more like those trying to
misappropriate his legacy today. (Narendra Modi is perceived to have
colluded with the butchers of Muslims in Gujarat in February--March
2002 despite being Gujarat's Chief Minister but even he prefers to
call himself "Chhota (or Junior) Sardar" after Patel.) Patel is no
longer considered the staunch Congressman and the unwavering
nationalist that he was. This essay is an attempt to rescue the image
of Sardar Patel from misappropriation by Hindu chauvinists and
communalists. For this purpose we look at the attitude Patel had to
the Minorities, including Muslims, and also Rashtriya Swayamsewak
Sangh (RSS) during the last days of his life.

# A bird's eye-view of Patel's life

Sardar Patel is credited with hatred for the ideology of socialism
and for leftists. Patel, of course, was the leader of the right-wing in
the national movement but strangely owned no property. He was
born into a peasant family of moderate means (with his father owning
10--12 acres of land); he worked his way up to the Middle Temple
Inn for his degree in Law and created a first-rate legal practice for
himself in Ahemdabad according to Maniben Patel's moral legacy.
he was rich but this did not include any wealth.[^/4] Incidentally,
peasants in Bardoli thrust the title of "Sardar" (or leader) on
Vallabhbhai Patel in 1928 not because he was any big jagirdar but
in recognition of his leadership of the movement against the hopeless
land revenue policy of the British Raj.

[^/4]: P.N. Chopra and Prabha Chopra (eds.), _op. cit._, p.30.

Patel was deeply anguished by the furious communal rioting of
the Partition days and none other than Gandhiji noted this fact.
Scholar's believe that in all between two to six lakh people may
have been killed during Partition riots and five to six million people
left homes each way to be called 'refugees' and 'Mohajirs' later.
These displaced persons also suffered abductions, rape and murder.
All this horrified Patel. "The Sardar always used to walk with his
head high but I tell you today he walks with his head bent," said
Gandhiji in September 1947.[^/5] Communal rioting was always justified
as 'reaction' and retaliation. Sardar Patel was not convinced with
this logic. He actually got this logic reversed by asking people in
Punjab not to attack any convoy of out-migrating Muslims for a week.

In one of the greatest speeches of his life at Amritsar on September
30, 1948, Patel said,

[^/5]: Rajmohan Gandhi, _Patel: A Life_ (Ahmedabad, Navjivan Publishing House, 1990), p.429.

>The butchery of innocent and defenseless men, women and
children does not behove brave men ... To fight against the
refugess is no fight at all. No laws of humanity or war among
honourable men permit the murder of people who have sought
shelter and protection.[^/6]

[^/6]: _Ibid_., pp. 430--431.

Yet, there is a lingering feeling that Patel was a strong leader who
had a no-nonsense attitude towards Muslims. This may be true but
this attitude, _per se_, did not make Sardar Patel communal. In fact,
Patel was blunt but balanced. In the wake of the carnage in Gujarat,
RSS created a furore by asking the minorities to earn the goodwill
of the majority.[^/7] In almost the same vein, Patel once gave the same
advice but hastily made amends. Patel declared "... The future of a
minority, any minority, is to trust the majority. If the majority
misbehaves, it will suffer. It will be a misfortune to this country if
the majority does not realize its own responsibility. If I were a
member of a minority community, I would forget that I belong to a
minority community, why should not a member of any community
be the Prime Minister of this country? ..."[^/8] Four months after
Independence 70,000 so-called Nationalist Muslims (including
Maulana Abdul Kalam Azad) met at Lucknow but they failed to
condemn the attack of Pakistan on Kashmir. This infuriated Patel
and within a fortnight of the aforementioned meeting, the Sardar
was in Lucknow. In his public speech there he warned Muslims
against "trying to ride two horses" ('Those who were disloyal could
not remain in India for the atmosphere would become too hot for
them') Patel said without mincing words.[^/9] But, speaking in the
Constituent assembly, Patel also acknowledged, "... a discontented
minority is a burden and a danger ... (so) we must not do anything to
injure the feelings of any minority so long as it is not
unreasonable ..."[^/10]

[^/7]: "Hindu goodwill key to Muslims' safety: RSS", _Hindustan Times_ (New Delhi edition),
March 18,2002.

[^/8]: P.N. Chopra (ed.) _The Collected Works of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel_, Volume XIV (1
January 1949--31 December, 1949) (Delhi Konark Publishers, 1999), p. 276.

[^/9]: P.N. Chopra (ed), _The Collected Works of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel_, Volume XIII (1
January 1948--31 December, 1948), (Delhi, Konark Publishers, 1998), p.21.

[^/10]: P.N. Chopra (ed), _op. cit._, Vol. XIV, 1999,p.277.

The speech at Lucknow raised the hackles of all Muslims,
nationalists and other. Some amongst them went to protest against
its tenor/content to Gandhiji. This led Gandhiji to remark on January
15,1948, "... Many Muslim friends had complained to me of the
Sardar's so-called anti-Muslim attitude. ... The Sardar has a bluntness
of speech which sometimes unintentionally hurts though his heart
was expansive enough to accommodate all. ..."[^/11] The very next day,
i.e. on 16th January, replying to the welcome address of Bombay
Municipal Corporation, Patel himself tried to clear the air in this
regard. Patel said,

[^/11]: Rajmohan Gandhi, _op. cit._, p. 465.

>We have just heard people shouting that Muslims should be
>removed from India. Those who do so have gone mad with anger.
>I am a frank man. I say bitter things to Hindus and Muslims alike.
>At the same time I maintain that I am a friend of Muslims.
>
>Some of them went to Gandhiji and complained over my
>Lucknow speech. ... Gandhiji felt compelled to defend me. That
>also pained me. For, after all, I am not a week person who would
>like to be defended by others.[^/12]

[^/12]: _Ibid_.

Patel was a nationalist who respected the rights of minorities and
that he opposed Hindu communalism just as staunchly as he
condemned Muslim League. So he put the Muslim communalists
and RSS workers in the same category and tried to treat them with
an 'even hand.'

# With the Minorities

Patel derived his ideas and opinions from experience. The good thing
about this empiricism-driven ontology was that it prevented Patel
from behaving like a charlatan with ideological blinds. His biographer
notes that Patel's work among Muslims was "minimal" and his
movement in the world of Muslims (and vice versa) was negligible.
The Sardar had known only some Muslims like a servant in Bakrol,
a tenant in Karamsad, Qureshi of the Sabarmati ashram and a few
Congress colleagues who happened to be Muslims.[^/13] Out of these
colleagues he admired Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan's unflinching
loyalty to Indian unity and, despite differences, respected Maulana
Azad. When some leader alleged in the Constituent Assembly that
with regard to safeguards Maulana Azad remained non-committal
on separate reservation for Muslims, Patel hit back. The Sardar said,
"... Maulana Azad is not a cipher; he has a conscience. ... Maulana
Azad is a man who has stood up against the whole community
throughout his life and even in crises ..." He reminded the Assembly
that Azad had "not changed his clothes" after Partition and assured
them that the Maulana would not have "remained here" if he
"believed that his nation was separate."[^/14] This appreciation was
mutual becausc even Maulana thought that Patel may have made a
better Prime Minister than Nehru because he was a more "practical
politician."[^/15]

[^/13]: _Ibid_., p. 352.

[^/14]: P.N. Chopra (ed.),_op. cit._, Vol. XIV, p. 277.

[^/15]: Humayun Kabir, _The Statesman_ (Calcutta).July 25, 1969 quoted in Rafiq Zakaria, _Sardar
Patel and Indian Muslims: An analysis of his relations with Muslims --- before and after
India's Partition_ (Mumbai, Bharatiya Vidya Bhawan, 1996), p. 23.

The fault in Patel's empiricism-driven ontology was that despite
his tall stature, Patel's experience was limited and the social vision
based on this incomplete knowledge was also severely restricted.
Bereft of any long term view or a holistic understanding, the Sardar's
attitude to Minorities vacillated from touchiness (about betrayal of
faith or factionalism among colleagues) to generosity. Sometimes,
especially in the 1920s, Patel sounded self-critical in dealing with
the fears and need of the Minorities. A famous quote in this respect
came in Bharuch in 1921 when Patel urged Hindus to join the
Khilafat movement. He said "Hindu--Muslim unity is yet like a tender
plant. We have to nurture it extremely carefully over a long period;
for our hearts are not yet as clean as they should be."[^/16] According
to Rafiq Zakaria his attitude to minorities changed with time. It
hardened with the success of Muslim Leaguers after 1937. We,
however, find that Patel retained a distinction between the Muslim
Leaguer and the common Muslim till the very end.

[^/16]: _Ibid_., p.8.

After 1937, Patel not only decided to deal with Muslim Leaguers
firmly (rather than generously) but he also became irritable to
betrayal of the cause of freedom and impatient with the contumacious
factionalism spawned by Congress colleagues who happened to be
Muslim in 1944. Patel was very angry with Syed Mahmud (1889--1971),
lawyer of Patna and a personal friend of Jawaharlal Nehru.
This Congress leader from Bihar was reported to have begged his
way out of the Yeravada jail (on October 5, 1944) by secretly
declaring to viceroy Wavell that he had nothing to do with the Quit-India movement anymore. This shocked the Sardar all the more
because Mahmud shared his cell in jail with Jawharlal Nehru.
Conveying his sense of betrayal to Dahyabhai, his son, Patel said
that if "God had given death instead, his (Syed Mahmud's) life would
have retained a pleasant odour."[^/17] For every Syed Mahmud who said
"Sorry" for their role in the struggle for Independence, there were at
least ten Nationalist Muslims who did not swerve from their chosen
course of action. This thought should have given solace to Patel
but, strangely, it did not. Moreover, there were many organisations.
which claimed to represent Hindus but betrayed the Quit-India
movement (like Hindu Mahasabha leaders Shyama Prasad Mukherji
or even Sir J.P. Srivastava). Even they did not invite the wrath of
Patel as one poor Syed Mahmud. Patel was to become a relentless
opponent of Hindu communalists (Mahasabha-ites and RSS both)
but only after Independence.

[^/17]: Rajmohan Gandhi, _op. cit._, p.332.

Sardar Patel had almost a pathological hatred for Rafi Ahmad
Kidwai. Patel thought that this Congress leader from UP was corrupt
and that he was responsible for factionalism which exacerbated the
Sardar's differences with Jawaharlal Nehru. Maniben, his daughter
and Secretary, said the influence of Kidwai and Mridula Sarabhai
on Nehru was largely responsible for the rift between her father and
the Prime Minister.[^/18] In his passionate dislike of Kidwai, the Sardar
missed the fact that Congress was like a federation of different
ideologies which led to natural fission. So, Nehru and Patel had
inter-personal problems and Congress had factions but the two
stalwarts also had ideological differences. Nehru thought private
property should not be a fundamental right, privy purses/maintenance to Princes was unnecessary and minorities should be
dealt with more gently. Patel did not think otherwise but he did not
quite think in the same way.[^/19] With regard to factions, it should be
said that Patel himself was not above faction-mongering. Barely four
months before his death (on December 15, 1950), Patel supported
by Azad and Rajagopalachari, put up P.D. Tandon for the Congress
presidency in Nasik session of All India Congress Committee. Nehru's
candidate, J.B. Kriplani, lost despite the canvassing done for him by
Kidwai and Mridula Sarabhai.

[^/18]: P.N. Chopra and Prabha Chopra (eds.), _op. cit._, p.29.

[^/19]: S. Gopal, _Jawaharlal Nehru: A Biography_ (Abridged Edition) (New Delhi, Oxford
University Press, 1989,) pp. 213--215.

Patel, despite his dislike of some Nationalist Muslim leaders,
was not keen to deprive Minorities of the few constitutional
safeguards they wanted to protect themselves against
'majoritarianism.' He was satisfied by only asking the representatives
of Minorities in the Constituent Assembly to drop their demand for
separate electorates and reservation. He quoted Mohammad Ali to
say that separate representation was a "command performance"
(meaning that it was hatched like a conspiracy by the British
colonialists and some Muslim landlords following the Swadeshi
Movement). Patel urged representatives of the minorities, 'let us now
have a "consent performance" in giving it up.' He told them
assurringly on May 26, 1949, "Trust us and see what happens."
Quoting figures from an election that took place in Ahmedabad
Municipality "a month ago", he said all Muslims who contested on
joint electorates won despite opposition from people financed by
the League, "... Free and scheduled election has proved that any
kind of impediment by way of reservation or other things is bad for
us. If we leave the thing to be settled by the majority and the minority
among themselves they will do so and it will bring credit to all. Why
are you afraid? ..."[^/20]

[^/20]: P.N. Chopra (ed.), _op. cit._, Vol. XIV, 1999, pp. 275 & 277--8.

Not just in rioting, the life, limb and property of Muslims was
also at risk in sundry attacks by some self-proclaimed defenders of
India. Patel was quite angry and upset by this trend. So, in a speech
at Gwalior on December 5, 1948, Patel declared, "... It is none of
the individual's concern to deal with any disloyal Muslim. That must
be the duty of the state. But a loyal Muslim must be treated as your
own brother. If you think you can go on constantly troubling loyal
Muslims because they happen to be Muslims, then our freedom has
not been worthwhile."[^/21]

[^/21]: P.N. Chopra (ed.),op ._cit._, XIII, 1998, p324.

Patel deserves credit, along with the leadership of India's freedom
movement and representatives of the people in the Constituent
Assembly for two provisions in India's constitution. The Indian
Constitution actually gave away in practice what political theorists
were to debate 30 years later, i.e. protection of cultural and
educational rights of religious minorities and compensatory
discrimination (through reservation in representative institutions,
public employment and education) to social groups, like Scheduled
Castes, disadvantaged by a history of oppressive social practices.[^/22]

[^/22]: Nirija Gopal Jayal (ed.) _Democracy in India_ (New Delhi, Oxford University Press, 2001), p. 39.

In the Constituent Assembly Patel was the Chairman of the
Advisory Committee on Minorities. He pacified the fears of the
minorities with constitutional safeguards instead of creating anxieties
among them like the Hindu chauvinists do. K.M. Munshi and P.D.
Tandon were the closest aides of Patel. They opposed the right to
propagate religion but, out of care and concern for the opinion of
the leaders of the Minorities, Patel advocated it and succeeded in
having it included in Article 25 of the Constitution. He even got the
Constitution to guarantee to Minorities the right to conserve their
"distinct language, script or culture" and "to establish and administer
educational institutions of their choice" under Article (s) 29 and 30.[^/23] Some of the other secular/federal features of the Constitution
which Hindu communalists disliked, viz. Absence of a common civil
code and even Article 370 giving special status to Jammu & Kashmir,
also had the blessings of Sardar Patel.

[^/23]: Rafiq Zakaria, _op. cit._, pp. 92--3.

Rajmohan Gandhi has noted that Patel defended Urdu's place
in All India Radio and supported the Nehru--Liaqat pact of 1950
which was opposed by Shyama Prasad Mukherji who resigned from
the Central cabinet over this. In February 1949 he said, "Hindu Raj
was a mad idea" and added that "it will kill the soul of India." All
this came later but Patel had already put in the hit list of Hindu
Mahasabha extremists in 1947--48.[^/24]

[^/24]: "Patel vs. Gandhi", _The Hindu_, April 6, 2002.

# Against RSS

Immediately after Independence, Patel found the activities of RSS
objectionable as they were not constructive but vengeful. So almost
six weeks before RSS was banned, Patel lambasted it in a speech at
Jaipur. His advice to the youth to take up nation-building activities
came with a rider to stay away from RSS. "We old men have
completed our mission. India has secured her freedom. The mantle
will now fall on young shoulders and they should be ready to
undertake it. They cannot do this if they waste their efforts on trifles.
If they follow the path which the Sangh has been following, they
would be doing a disservice to the country." The core of his objection
to RSS was that its vision was jaundiced and its actions prejudicial
to nation-building. "There is a great deal to be done to make India
militarily strong. Very substantial effort must back the army. All that
cannot be achieved by the Sangh which are being used for breaking
the heads of a handful of Muslims. ..." In this speech his advice to
RSS enthusiasts was to be patient and not be adventurous vis-à-vis
Pakistan. To quote Patel again, "... There is no point in your hoping
to get Pakistan back into the Indian union. It will come of its own
accord and we should, therefore, let Pakistan remain as they are. I
am certain that whether they grow strong or weak, ultimately it would
be better for us to get them back when they themselves feel like
doing so ..."[^/25]

[^/25]: P.N. Chopra (ed.) _The Collected Works of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel_, Volume XII (1 January 1947--31 Decembeer, 1947), (Delhi, Konark Publishers, 1998), p. 260.

Sardar Patel thought that what he said in this speech was very
important. One sympathiser of RSS, Gangadhar Rao of Belgaum,
wrote to Patel that RSS neither deserved contempt nor suppression
because he found it to be a "well-knit and disciplined organisation."
Patel did not contest this but wanted Rao to see the advice he gave
the youth about this organisation in his aforementioned speech at
Jaipur.[^/26]

[^/26]: _Ibid_., p.265--6.

Patel had little sympathy for ideology, organisation or activities
of RSS after Independence. In December 1948, at AICC session in
Jaipur, Patel addressed a mammoth gathering of Congress workers
who had come from different parts of the country. Saying that 'the
real danger today was internal', Patel urged Congressmen to guide
people in every village and town against the danger to the country
from RSS and other communal organisations. He said, "it is our
determined resolve that we will not allow RSS or any other
communal organisation to throw the country back on the path of
slavery and disintegration." He called himself "a soldier who had
fought formidable force" but added that he "did not like to fight
against my own brethren." To display his determination on the
subject, Patel declared, "However, if I feel that such a fight is
necessitated by the country's good, I shall not hesitate to fight my
own son."[^/27]

[^/27]: P.N. Chopra (ed.), _op. cit._ Vol.XIII, 1998, pp. 348--9.

Patel ridiculed the claim of RSS to be defenders of Hinduism.
Around the same time at a speech in Gwalior (on December 5, 1948),
Patel assured his audience that "we are also Hindus" and "to be
Hindus is not their (meaning Hindu Mahasabha and RSS's)
monopoly"; he clarified that "we did not assume power to advance
the cause of Muslims at the expense of Hindus"; but he maintained,
"We do not believe in killing our opponents as some of our critics
do" because "Those who wish to rule by anger must go the way
Ravana went." The ban on RSS was then into its tenth month and
there were rumours that its cadres were going to offer Satyagraha
against this. Patel pooh-poohed the plan by maintaining, "They
(meaning RSS workers) can never do so. Those whose minds are
full of poison can never succeed in launching Satyagraha."[^/28]

[^/28]: _Ibid_., pp. 324--5.

Patel wanted RSS to "know that Hinduism would not be saved
by rowdyism." Patel even did not understand "the manner in which
the organisation had been working," how "the entire work of RSS
was directed" or why the leadership was so selectively drawn. He
said, "Anyone who wanted to start a movement should do so openly.
But there was something secret about the RSS. It had no constitution
of its own. Its provincial heads, the Sangh chalaks, were all Mahratta
Brahmins."[^/29]

[^/29]: _Ibid_., pp. 348--9.

His strongest words were reserved for the para-military nature
of RSS. He said, "The RSS had an army of its own. I can understand
the existence of an army outside India, but the raising of an army,
whatever name it might be given, within the boundaries of India,
could not be permitted. Such an army was a potential danger to the
State and, therefore, had to be put down."[^/30]

[^/30]: _Ibid_.

To those eager to show Sardar Patel as a semi-communal RSS
sympathiser, here was some more reason to re-think Patel, it seems,
wanted to Congressize the RSS and to Gandhize the Congress. So,
in the speech he advised RSS members to join the Indian National
Congress, "if they had the good of the country uppermost in their
hearts", and asked Congressmen to follow Gandhiji's ideals.[^/31]

[^/31]: _Ibid_.

Even in his correspondence with M.S. Golwalkar, the tenor of
Patel's opposition to RSS was relentless. After the ban on RSS,
Gowalkar must have written several letters to the "Honourable Home
Member" but five of these have been published. Out of these five
letters from Golwalkar, the Sardar replied to the first two himself.
Patel began his letters affectionately with "Brother Sri Golwalkar"
and signed them off enhusiastically as "Vallbhbhai Patel offers
Vandematram." But he gave the Sarsanghchalak no cause for relief.
He told the Subject Committee of Congress that he granted two
interviews to "_Guruji_" Golwalkar but regretted to have failed in
fathoming the fundamentals of the RSS organisation. This speaks a
lot for the wily ways of RSS considering that Patel was a shrewd
judge of character, according to Maniben. She said that the "first
impression and initial assessment of a person" made by her father
"rarely proved wrong."[^/32]

[^/32]: P.N. Chopra and Prabha Chopra (eds.), _op. cit._, p. 27.

Unable to understand, leave alone sympathise with RSS, Patel
authorised H.V.R. Iyengar, the Secretary in the Ministry of Home
Affairs, to handle the correspondence with Golwalkar. Iyengar faulted
Golwalkar on the from of his correspondence and did not relent on
the substance of his demand for lifting the ban on RSS. In striking
contrast to how the administration today allows itself to be bullied
by even the smallest functionary of the front organisations of the
Sangh Parivar, Iyengar refused to take nonsense from the Almighty
Sarsanghchalak himself. In one of these letter. Iyengar pointed out
that Golwalkar's language "constitutes a complete disregard of the
ordinary rules of courtesy and propriety." In reply to this, Golwalkar
begged to excused for offending the Government through his missives
but not without putting up a pompous defence of his conduct. The
Sarsangchalak claimed that a sense of high or low did not
predominate his organisation and (added sarcastically that) so he
had never used language suitable for rulers and masters. The pun
may have been understood by Iyengar but he declined to retort or to
lift the ban on RSS. Iyengar maintained that the Government had
evidence about systematic acts of violence by RSS and that it took
action only when its patience was exhausted as the organization
refused to mend its ways. Golwalkar, of course, thought this rebuke
from Iyengar was official haughtiness.[^/33] But was it so? Were some
more substantive issues germane to the future of India's new found
nation-state not involved in this debate? They probably were and it
is these that Patel mentioned in his speeches (referred earlier) and
letters.

[^/33]: P.N. Chopra (ed.), _op. cit._, Vol. XIV, 1999, pp. 295--6 & pp. 296--7.

Sardar Patel raised some fundamental issues regarding
communalism, nationalism and their difference in this inimitable
practical sort of way through a letter to "Brother Sri Golwalkar."
Explaining the reason for the ban on RSS, Patel in this letter dated
September 11, 1948, said there was no objection to the service of
Hindu society. The Sardar accepted that "young RSS workers
protected, Hindu women and children and strove much for their
sake." But the objectionable part arose when they, burning with
revenge, began attacking Mussalmans. Organising the Hindus and
helping them is one thing but going in for revenge for its sufferings
on innocent and helpless men, women and children is quite another
thing."[^/34]

[^/34]: _Ibid_., pp. 287--8.

Urging RSS to join Congress if it cared for the good of the country
and welfare of the people, Patel gave Golwalkar the principle of
true nationalism. Even Patel thought that in its virulent opposition
to Congress, RSS disregarded "all considerations of personality,
decency or decorum." The distribution of sweets on Gandhiji's death
by RSS men was something Patel never forgot or forgave them for.
He referred to this in his speech at Hyderabad on October 7, 1950,
less than ten weeks before his death.[^/35]

[^/35]: Chopra, P.N. (ed.) _The Collected Works of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel_, Volume XV (1
January 1950--15 December, 1950) (Delhi, Konark Publisheers, 1999), p. 235.

Patel refused to lift restrictions on RSS. He was unhappy that
inspite of the ban in 1948 RSS programmes had not changed and
that instead of coming to the right path, reports say "attempts to put
fresh life into their same old activities are afoot."[^/36] Then, after RSS
accepted the conditions of the Government, the ban on it was lifted
in July 1949. These conditions included the promise that RSS would
adopt a written constitution and publish it; restrict itself to cultural
activities; forswear violence and secrecy; profess loyalty to India's
flag and constitution; and create a democratic organisation.[^/37]

[^/36]: P.N. Chopra (ed.), _op. cit._, Vol. XIV, 1999, p. 288.

[^/37]: Rajmohan Gandhi, _op. cit._, p. 497.

It is noted Maniben's diary that on August 16, 1949 the
Sarsanghchalak along with his Secretary, Dani, met Patel. That
evening itself the prime Minister was informed by Patel that
Golwalkar was "quite receptive and full of undertaking." So, Patel
thought, the Sarsanghchalak would "not give us any trouble and
now adapt himself to the new requirements."[^/38]

[^/38]: P.N. Chopra (ed.), _op. cit._, Vol. XIV, 1999, p. 288.

The taste of the pudding, however, lies in the eating. Ironically,
evidence of the Government's unchanged, hostile attitude to RSS is
to found in the complaint of its Sarsanghchalak. Golwalkar protested
on April 5, 1950 that "our main and responsible workers have been
put under arrest" though the ban on RSS was lifted in July 1949. In
his letter to "respected Sardar Saheb" (in his letters of November 5
and 24, 1948 Golwalkar endearingly called Patel "Honourable
Sardarji" but this intimacy was short-lived) the Sarsanghchalak
grumbled bitterly about how the Government was unmoved though
RSS was compliant. Golwalkar said the arrests had been made despite
the fact that the RSS thought "it is totally wrong to disturb the peace
of the country," that it disapproved attempts "to foster hostility
against the Government to gain petty ends" and extended its hand
"to all schemes that are aimed at promoting the welfare of masses".[^/39] In his reply dated April 8,1950 Patel replied to "Dear Golwalkar"
in an absolute formal, business-like manner. The mode of warmly
addressing the Sarsanghchalak as "Brother Sri Golwalkar" had been
dropped and so had the offerings of "Vandematram" as was done
earlier in 1948. Patel said he would meet Golwalkar as "many things
had happened." (Patel was alluding to the Nehru--Liaqat Pact, the
attempt of Hindu communalists to oppose it and the externment of
Hindu Mahasabha leaders from Delhi due to their 'objectionable
activities prejudicial to law and order here.') The Home Minister
refused to even acknowledge the complaint that the "main and
responsible workers" of RSS had been arrested.[^/40]

[^/39]: P.N Chopra (ed.), _op. cit._, Vol. XV, p. 101.

[^/40]: _Ibid_., pp. 104 & 108.
