# Preface

::: chapter-content
The major part of my professional life was spent as a counsel for the
defence. The richness of this is largely due to the trust placed in me
by the countless people whose freedom I found myself defending. It is
this that has carried me through dark days, providing hope when it would
have been easy to despair. Friends, colleagues and far-off sympathisers
have also lent me strength and support. The respect I have been accorded
by the leaders of various revolutionary groups as well as the admiration
of their cadres has borne me lightly across many troubled times. The
unquestioning yet critical support of my wife Vasanth and children,
Chitra, Kalpana and Arvind, has been vital through these years.

After the revocation of the Emergency, I was elected President of the
Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee. I held this post for fifteen
years. I owe my growth as a defender of democratic and human rights to
this period, which also helped me outgrow both extreme left dogmatism
and impotent liberal rhetoric. My association with the members of the
APCLC, especially with K. Balagopal, has been valuable. In the People's
Union of Civil Liberties, V.M. Tarkunde has been a source of tremendous
support. My friends in the PUCL --- Yash Pal Chibbar, Rajni Kothari,
Kuldip Nayyar and Rajinder Sachar --- have been precious to me. I cannot
forget Arun Shourie's friendship, love and total support of my human
rights activity in the decade following the Emergency, particularly
during the tenures of the Tarkunde Committee and the Bhargava
Commission. I am indebted to my young friends in the human rights
movement, too many to enumerate, who have been an inexhaustible source
of inspiration and energy.

It is the period from 1975 onwards that provide the background for these
articles. Some were written for advocacy, some to clarify my own
understanding. At no point did I expect that they would come together as
a book. Pulling these scattered pieces together, organising them and
checking out the references has been a Herculean task undertaken with
love and commitment. Without my daughter Kalpana's effort this book
would not have been possible. My thanks to Subbalakshmi and Padmini for
secretarial assistance. Finally, I am grateful to Orient Longman,
especially to Hemlata K. Shankar, for her enthusiasm and personal
attention to every aspect of the publication.

Much of my own understanding and clarity has come from what I have read
(voraciously) through the years. Together these pieces trace my
intellectual and political growth. If they provide a single insight or
inspiration to anyone who is seeking the tools to fight for a principle,
then my labours will not have been in vain.

\ 

K. G. KANNABIRAN

January 2004
