# The Saga of Impunity

The relationship between violence, power and the law is especially
evident to those committed to democratic values. There is an
overwhelming play of violence as power and power as violence, sometimes
in breach of the law and sometimes as a tool for its enforcement. If
violence in society is perceived as a breach of the law, the law itself
is equally violent and in fact has an even more debilitating effect
because of its systematic and thorough ruthlessness backed by official
sanction.

While still in my college days, my enthusiasm for the communist movement
suffered a setback after I read the then popular anthology of writings
called *The God that Failed*. After the October Revolution many
intellectuals were attracted by the communist experiment, which if
carried out successfully, promised the possibility of an egalitarian
society. But this vision was disrupted by the Stalin--Hitler pact and
subsequent abuse of power. Abuse of power is synonymous with violence.
Fascism and totalitarian power in general represent a massive abuse of
power against large human collectives, with guaranteed impunity. From
the 1930s to the end of the Second World War, power was exercised
through violence, both internally, i.e. within a nation, and externally,
in relationships between nations. This violence was always legitimised
and explained by law.

While the rule of law is a civilising factor, it is at the same time an
instrument that facilitates the uncritical acceptance of the deployment
of violence for governance and to justify war. This interplay of
violence and power has little to do with the ideology that states or
governments profess.

It was as a consequence of this use of power that countries met together
to draft and adopt the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, with the
sole purpose of ensuring that human rights would be protected by the
law.

Although the post-war world and newly liberated countries had
constitutions with entrenched rights, they too (like the countries that
were independent by then) abused power and defaulted in their conduct,
both according to the Declaration and their own constitutions.

India was no exception. By the late 1960s, all its grandiose five-year
plans had failed, and its mammoth state-owned industrial and trading
enterprises were no longer profitable and could not be justified on
grounds of accrual of any social benefits. The agricultural sector fared
no better. Very soon, the maintenance of law and order became the _raison
d'Ãªtre_ of governance. And this crisis was not India's alone, but one
that India shared with most of the world. The fragmentation of political
parties from right to left, the emergence of the _Naxalbari_ movement in
Bengal, Jaya Prakash Narayan's struggle to force accountability in
governance and fight authoritarian trends, particularly in the biggest
national party, the Indian National Congress, were all part of the
crisis. The movement led by JP (as he was known) was the first major
assault on the Indian national government after Independence, and the
first major test of all the institutions of governance, including the
judiciary. No institution was spared in this fight, and almost all
institutions of governance became ranged against the people. This period
also revealed the violence of law in all its facets.

Law represents a society's consensus for the regulation of human
activity in various fields, and the regulation of these activities by
the deployment of state power, a deployment that need not necessarily be
violent or backed by the threat of force. However, expressions like 'law
and order', 'public order' and 'state security' enable the state to
employ violence against the people without a corresponding obligation to
exercise discretion. Any scrutiny of this exercise of power by the state
is only possible after the damage has been done. An assembly of
protestors, for instance, brings to life the exercise of free speech and
the citizens' right to association and assembly. It also involves the
freedom of movement of the citizens constituting the assembly. There are
constitutional safeguards that protect these rights. Very briefly, in
maintaining public tranquility, the assembly of protesting persons may
be declared unlawful; they may be dispersed and their leaders taken into
custody. If the assembly does not disperse, force may be employed to
disperse it, but orders to open fire must only be issued in the presence
and with the authorisation of a magistrate. These safeguards, however,
have never been complied with, from Jallianwalla Bagh and the Hunter
Committee report during colonial times to the present day. S.
Satyamurti, the well-known South Indian politician, tabled an amendment
in the 1930s to the provisions dealing with 'public tranquillity' with a
view to reducing the harshness of the law. The law, of course, does not
provide any guidelines to measure the force used. The law only
stipulates that minimum force should be used; it does not seem to
consider that the force used is likely to take away life and liberty,
the very issues covered by Article 21 of the Constitution.

The law is employed to restrain the exercise of rights and to manage and
contain any unrest that may signal rebellion. The state confronts the
very first protest with ruthless dispersal and informs the citizen that
force will be used to contain public expression of discontent, no matter
how weak the protest. For instance, a protest by the visually challenged
before Andhra Pradesh government buildings against corruption and ill
treatment in their hostels was met with police batons. The police of
this state are not particularly wicked. The Delhi police has meted out
the same treatment for similar demonstrations. The constant promulgation
across the country of Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code,
prohibiting assembly of more than five persons without police
permission, points to the looming threat of violence legitimised by law.
Violation of this order may lead to preventive arrest or use of force if
the assembly does not disperse with threat and persuasion. The
promulgation itself is violence, because the rights to free speech,
assembly and movement stand withdrawn. Ironically, the government brings
this provision into operation around Parliament and the Legislative
Assemblies when they are in session, thereby protecting elected
representatives from the citizens who elected them. Violence under cover
of law manages to remain unaccountable. When Section 144 was questioned
by Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia in the Supreme Court, the latter did not define
the limits of the expressions 'law and order', 'public order' and
'security of state', but instead illustrated the areas of operation with
reference to concentric circles, the outermost being 'law and order',
the middle, 'public order', and the innermost, 'security of state'. The
court thus imbued these expressions with overriding qualities, as
Chomsky points out. And precisely because they are undefined, these
expressions abrogate all constitutional guarantees. Defining power would
limit it and make it accountable and enhance rights.

The battle between the exercise of rights and the exercise of power has
a long history. The stability of political institutions has always been
challenged in times of crisis. Anticipating such situations, the
Constitution and criminal law contain provisions to meet these
challenges.

Radical social movements, for instance, are seen initially as disrupters
of public order and later as a threat to state security. The state has
the power to invoke criminal laws for the arrest and prosecution of
persons it charges of treason and conspiracy to overthrow a lawfully
established government. It can also accuse them of waging war, which
charge divides itself into various ancillary offences like attempt to
wage war, concealment of a design to wage war, etc. Now, waging war
normally means carrying arms, ammunition or explosive substances. After
charging the suspect compendiously for waging war, the accused will then
also be charged under the Arms and Explosive Substances Act on the same
set of facts. The violence these prosecutions engender has to be seen to
be believed. From the time of arrest to the time of trial the persons
suspected of these offences are put through covert and overt forms of
violence. Between arrest and production before the court there is
custody with the police. The Constitution says the arrested person has
to be produced within 24 hours of his or her arrest. There is a
difference between actual arrest and legal arrest; actual arrest
precedes legal arrest. The time spent between the two may vary from two
days to several days or even weeks. The length of such custody always
depends on the alertness of the arrested person's friends and relatives.
Fearing the worst, they may not rush to court as they should, but try
and manage the person's release or production before the court. This
gives the police time to subject the arrested person to violence,
including the possibility of execution without reference or recourse to
law. This is yet another chapter of violence operating under the
protective arms of the law.

This is just the beginning. To leash legitimate protests the state often
formulates a vague and inchoate conspiracy charge incapable of precise
definition. The coming together of persons to agree to do unlawful acts
can never be proved, because it would require evidence not admissible
under law otherwise. The coming together need not be physical; a meeting
of minds is sufficient. The charge of conspiracy is a convenient tool to
target political movements. The British used it effectively during the
freedom struggle. By nature a sprawling charge, a large number of
persons can be recruited as accused in these cases. There are political
advantages to be gained by such elaborate trials. During the Meerut
conspiracy case, the British government aimed at undermining communism
by exposing the movement's leaders and turning national opinion against
them. An elaborate criminal proceeding was initiated against them,
making it difficult for the communists to later align with anti-British,
nationalist parties in India. In the course of this criminal proceeding,
legal precedents for the criminal prosecution of communist leaders were
set out in order to make future prosecution easier. Finally, it was
believed that 'a favourable judicial verdict would make it easier for the
Government to proclaim ordinances concerning similar situations, and if
required, to disband at an early stage in their development, such
organisations as the government considered dangerous.'[^1]

The principal function of the criminal justice system then appears to be
the power to use the judicial process to break an opposing political
movement and discredit it, with the executive and the judiciary working
in tandem. All the repressive laws used by the British against the
freedom struggle have been retained in independent India, despite
constitutional provisions mandating scrutiny.

1968 was a year of crisis. While there was no clear ideological
polarisation, there were fractures between adversarial groups within
various political parties, many of which split into two right across the
spectrum. Indira Gandhi split from the conservative block popularly
known as the Syndicate. She became the leader of a new faction which
claimed the following of the people. Her populist slogan reiterated the
Directive Principles, which brought the fundamental obligations of the
government centre-stage, 25 years after the Constitution had been
adopted. She was surrounded and encouraged by a political elite that
included well-meaning bureaucrats who sincerely believed that top-down
social transformation was possible. They found in the Directive
Principles a radical agenda which was not revolutionary. But there was a
fundamental problem. By positing that the Directive Principles were
prior to fundamental rights, in an environment in which hysteria was
orchestrated around 'forces of destabilisation', her party found it easy
to enforce political stability through the suspension of democracy and a
declaration of a moratorium on rights by invoking a state of emergency.
Increasing dissent was put down ruthlessly without the minimum procedure
to be followed for the forfeiture of someone's liberty. It was during
this period that the Supreme Court was restructured and the Maintenance
of Internal Security Act (MISA) came up for judicial review. The court
that had taken an adversarial position on the attack on the right to
property[^2] did not display the same eagerness when it came to
personal liberty. The intellectual rigour displayed by the court in
dealing with property rights was missing when dealing with the right to
liberty (an expression which includes the right to free speech,
association and assembly). The incarceration of a large number of people
under preventive detention laws was validated. This was apart from the
large number of people held in illegal custody all over the country. In
Andhra Pradesh alone, I appeared on behalf of some five hundred
detainees between 1975 and 1977. One of the earliest cases to question
the validity of the proclamation of Emergency and of the new provisions
introduced under MISA was filed in the A.P. High Court. This case,
decided by the full bench, became a precedent for the decision by the
Supreme Court in ADM Jabalpur. The full bench in A.P. upheld the
validity of the act and the detentions. The Advocate General of Andhra
Pradesh claimed, even before the Attorney General could, that if a
police officer shoots down a citizen on the roads, no action could be
taken against him during a period of emergency.

All this in the name of security of the state. The definitions of the
words 'security' and 'state' have never been subjected to scrutiny,
despite the transition in politics from absolutism to democracy. The
Indian state, originally constituted to be a democracy that would
represent a plurality of interests, grew absolutist during the 1960s. An
activist court was now increasingly perceived as a substitute for
politics, masking the undermining of rights that was already under way.
Judges talked about 'barefoot lawyers' and 'door delivery of justice',
even as the ground was prepared for the proclamation of emergency in 1975. The abuse of power under emergency rule was legion, as revealed by
the _Shah Commission_ and other commissions of enquiry. The emphasis in
this and other enquiries was on the fundamental rights of free speech,
assembly, association and personal liberty.

In Andhra Pradesh, as a result of internal turbulence within the
communist movement, the party split into two, and from a further split
emerged the _Naxalbari_ experiment and the CPI ML assertion that armed
struggle was the only road to social change. These ideas spread like a
forest fire from _Naxalbari_ to Srikakulam. The declaration of the policy
of armed struggle and individual annihilation of class enemies paved the
way for a major onslaught. This provided the state with a legitimate
pretext for abusing power, unleashing violence and rendering the law
totally irrelevant. The _Naxalite_ movement preceded the Emergency by six
or seven years. Initially, the A.P. Preventive Detention Act, 1970, and
the A.P. Suppression of Disturbances Act, 1967, were used to silence a
group of revolutionary Telugu writers, with three of them being
arrested. The 1970 act provided that every ground in a detention order
could be deemed sufficient for a detention. This was to circumvent the
requirement that the grounds shown must have some relevance to the
activities of the detainee, to satisfy the authority that the activities
alleged were detrimental to public order or the security of the state.
By declaring that one or the other ground was relevant, the act created
a fiction which in effect dispensed with the satisfaction of the
authority, thus disabling the courts from setting aside the order. The
High Court struck down the act as invalid, as violating Article 22(5) of
the Constitution.[^3] Of significance here is the assumption that
rights do not inhere automatically in citizens. A right becomes
available only when, through litigation, a certificate is obtained from
the court allowing the citizens to speak, write, assemble and move as an
assembly, and stating that such activity does not disturb public order
or the security of the state.

The _Naxalite_ movement in Andhra had its base initially at Srikakulam, a
hilly terrain with dense forests covering an area of 600 square miles.
These areas were inhabited by the Jatapu and Savara tribes. Like other
tribal areas in the country, these peoples have been subjected to
immense exploitation and were being organised by the _Naxalites_ to assert
their rights. On 31 October 1967, some land-owners intercepted tribals
on their way to a meeting at Mondemkhal and opened fire, killing two of
them. That these areas had been badly neglected is an admitted fact.
That such areas will always attract political activity is axiomatic.
Instead of addressing questions of exploitation in the tribal areas, the
government exercised its power to liquidate political activity. Almost
all the tribal areas were notified as 'disturbed' under the A.P.
Suppression of Disturbances Act, 1967, and the _Naxalite_ movement there
was ruthlessly crushed. Once an area has been so notified, any assembly
of more than five becomes unlawful. To disperse such an assembly a
sub-inspector can open fire to kill. It was the abuse of this repressive
provision which gave birth to 'encounters'. Persons were apprehended
outside the notified areas, taken inside those areas and killed. The
leadership was decimated in these encounters. More than 150 _Naxalites_
were killed in this way and the rest of the leaders were prosecuted. 140
accused (and around 1,000 witnesses) endured a prolonged trial that
began in 1970 on charges of conspiracy to kill, murder and pillage and
conspiracy to wage war, apart from sedition. Although most of the
accused were tried for overt acts, all these various prosecutions were
tied together and projected as offences committed in pursuance of an
earlier conspiracy, as in law conspiracy is a distinct offence. All
offences that are pending or concluded may be put in issue in a trial
for conspiracy. The possibility of arriving at conflicting conclusions
cannot be ruled out. Nagabushanam Patnaik, for instance, was found
guilty of murder and sentenced to death by a sessions court where he did
not defend himself. It was an _ex parte_ death sentence! The president of
India commuted the sentence to life. Later, in the conspiracy trial, the
same murder was put in issue and the judge found that the accused had
nothing to do with the murder. The carrying out of the death sentence
would have been without the authority of law. Later, when the matter was
taken to the Supreme Court on the ground that his serving a sentence
would be violative of Article 21, the principle of finality was invoked
to refuse interference. One had to wait till _Antulay_ to reopen finality
on grounds of palpable injustice.[^4]

The Secunderabad conspiracy case went on for fifteen years and all
forty-five accused were acquitted. However, these acquittals really
obscure the abuse of power and the law. They also obscure the violence
employed using the law as a shield. The accused were held for long
periods. The anguish and mental stress suffered by their families, the
uncertainty of their return, the near bankruptcy to which these families
are reduced, all these are factors that are critical to the assessment
of the system.

Politics is treated as a crime. The subversion of law begins with the
reduction of politics to a crime. After such subversion, the law becomes
a pretext for violence. The liquidation of political dissent brings up
the troubling erasure of the human rights of political dissenters. The
position of human rights activists that the political philosophy of a
targeted group should not affect the protection of their rights is
misinterpreted and projected as political support for the targeted
group, be they _Naxalites_ or terrorists. On the contrary, this concern
attempts to curb the state from turning into the biggest violator of the
law, with an impunity that destroys governance in all its facets.

This kind of large-scale liquidation was carried out in West Bengal and
Andhra Pradesh, and in the latter state it has become part of
administrative practice. In Andhra Pradesh, 'encounter killings' average
around 150 to 200 per year. The practice of liquidation is also familiar
in Punjab, and in the state of Jammu and Kashmir. Advocate Kalra was
killed for auditing the dead bodies of Punjabi youth suspected to be
terrorists. Andrabi, a practising advocate in Srinagar, was killed
because he took the law and the Constitution seriously, and questioned
the ways of the government in containing militancy. Dr. Ramanatham of
Warangal, Japa Laxma Reddi of Karimnagar, Advocate Narra Prabhakar Reddy
of Warangal, Advocate Purushotham of Hyderabad and Syed Azam Ali of
Nalgonda, all from Andhra Pradesh, were killed for demanding that the
government should abide by the Constitution and its laws. There has been
no investigation leading to trial in almost all these cases and in all
the cases of 'encounter' recounted earlier. In a perpetually misgoverned
society, any movement for good governance and governance according to
law becomes rebellion.

The movement for human rights is a struggle against misrule and
unconstitutional governance. We have been fighting against encounters
and exposing impunity in governance from the revocation of the Emergency
in 1975 through various commissions of enquiry appointed by the Janata
government. A commission presided over by a former judge of the Supreme
Court, Justice Vashisht Bhargava, to go into the question of encounters
in Andhra Pradesh, was appointed at the behest of the central government
on the basis of reports submitted by the Tarkunde Committee. This
enquiry was aborted after a year by a notification by the state
government that its proceedings should be _in camera_[^in-camera-proceedings]. However, the
struggle to contain state violence continued and three writ petitions
were filed from Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh. In these
petitions, squarely covered by Article 21 of the Constitution, the state
was accused of systematically killing people. Characteristically,
instead of reckoning with the seriousness of the accusation, the court
accepted the unsupported claim of the state that magisterial inquiries
had been conducted into these killings, and the petitions were
dismissed.

[^in-camera-proceedings]: Unlike regular court proceedings which are available for any member of public & press to view, in-camera proceedings are done behind closed doors with no access to public/press. For more, _see_ (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/In_camera).

Where liquidation is used against a targeted political group, it becomes
a crime against humanity. Where a religious or ethnic group is targeted
it is genocide. Citizens can guard against fellow citizens who violate
the law; and the state is entrusted with the task of protecting life and
liberty by an elaborate system of laws and through institutions meant to
cope with and defuse the tensions produced by competing forces in
society. These tensions, created by social and other imbalances, can
scarcely be resolved by the use of violence by the state, a major
premise of all liberal democracies.

Unfortunately, there appears to be no consensus about including a
targeted political group within the definition of genocide. It is now
possible to bring these killings within the scope of crimes against
humanity, a distinct offence under the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court. While on paper at least, this last is set to prevent
member states from committing crimes against people living in various
countries, every member state is guilty of continuous violations of
human rights that result in killing a large number of people with
impunity and without any remedy. Will the International Criminal Court
work at all in a world where all governments are bent upon reducing
Hitler and Mussolini to small-time operators? The movement for human
rights marks a departure from traditional politics, by laying particular
stress on the fundamental rights to liberty of the person, free speech,
assembly and association; and this is where its significance lies.

Like all human rights activists, I am not unmindful of the group
violence perpetuated by various 'extremists' or 'terrorists', leading to
mindless killing and destruction. But the answer to this cannot be the
abandonment of governance and civilised conduct on the part of the
state. Impunity is never the answer. This sanction of impunity throws
into question the legitimacy of governance and order and points to decay
in the system. It is a matter that calls for a national debate. Unless
human rights becomes part of political activity, unless human rights
discourse forms part of the substrata of our political arrangements, we
will have no road to civilised governance.


[^1]:
Pramita Ghosh, _Meerut Conspiracy Case and Left Wing in India_, 1978,
pp. 161--162.

[^2]:
_Golak Nath v. State of Punjab_, AIR 1967 SC 1643.

[^3]:
Article 22(5) of the Constitution reads: 'When any person is
detained in pursuance of an order made under any law providing for
preventive detention, the authority making the order shall, as soon
as may be, communicate to such person the grounds on which the order
has been made and shall afford him the earliest opportunity of
making a representation against the order.'

[^4]: _AR.
Antulay v. R.S. Nayak_, AIR 1988 SC 1531. A judicial authority
violating a fundamental right (though binding until it is set aside)
may be set aside for that reason. For a discussion see Durga Das
Basu, _Shorter Constitution of India_, Thirteenth Edition, Nagpur:
Wadhwa, 2002, pp. 39--40.
