# Justice Must be Seen to be Done

Human rights as a concept, as a principle of jurisprudence, as a code of
conduct governing the nations of the world, completed fifty years on 10
December 1998. The atrocities committed by the Nazis and Fascists on the
people of their own countries and against the people, combatant and
non-combatant, in the territories occupied by them during the Second
World War, were the principal motivation for the victorious nations to
promote the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

Instead of imposing treaties on the vanquished, the United Nations
(U.N.) Charter signed in 1945 set out to establish an international
legal order with the object of outlawing aggressive wars. Towards that
end, it set down guidelines to defuse conflicts by stipulating that
disputes should be settled in conformity with justice and international
law. Friendly relations among nations are a mandatory requirement. The
operating principle among nations should be based on respect for equal
rights and selfdetermination of peoples, as well as respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race,
sex, language or religion. However, the charter, which talked about
human rights and fundamental freedoms, didn't define, describe or
enumerate these rights and freedoms. To remedy these defects the U.N.
drafted the famous Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was
adopted on 10 December 1948.

The setting up of the Nuremberg and Tokyo War Crime Tribunals has some
relevance here. In the words of Justice Robert Jackson of the U.S.
Supreme Court, who appeared as America's chief prosecutor at the war
crimes trials in Nuremberg:

> That four great Nations, flushed with victory and stung by injury,
> stay the hand of vengeance and voluntarily submit their captive
> enemies to the judgment of the law is one of the most significant
> tributes that Power has ever paid to Reason.[^5]

But these tribunals were constituted by the victorious nations, and
therefore the U.S.A. was not indicted for a horrendous violation of
human rights, namely, the explosion of atom bombs over Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. The Holocaust Museum in Washington, D.C., is a grim reminder
to posterity of what power can do, but there should also be a museum
depicting the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and its continuing
aftereffects. This, I believe, the U.S.A. owes to the people of the
world.

These events, the subsequent witch hunt of suspected communists during
the McCarthy period, and the persecution of Vietnam war dissenters and
draft card burners underscore the necessity of a strong and enforceable
human rights code. During the whole period after the Second World War,
what was highlighted was the absence of human rights in the Soviet Union
and the Eastern European countries and not the paranoid response of the
U.S.A. and the consequent large-scale human rights violations. In 1988,
George H.W. Bush began his presidential campaign by attacking the
Democratic Party's candidate, Michael Dukakis, as a card holder of the
American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), as if it was treason to be a
member of the ACLU.

All these trends did not halt the progress of the human rights movement.
In fact, the Nuremberg and Tokyo Tribunals provided the U.N. with the
impetus to set up a permanent International Criminal Court to try
large-scale human rights violations. Nonetheless, the Nuremberg and
Tokyo Tribunal trials were the earliest attempt to try human rights
violations as crimes.

When, at the behest of the U.N. General Assembly, the International Law
Commission prepared a draft Code of Offences against Peace and Security
of Mankind, the international body took the first step towards
universalising the concept of the rule of law. The effort did not
receive attention until 1990, when the International Law Commission
resumed its work on the setting up of a court with international
criminal jurisdiction for dealing with crimes against humanity.

The idea of a permanent court took root after the break-up of the former
Yugoslavia. It was only after the outbreak of internecine violence
between the constituents of the former Yugoslavia that a working group
under the International Law Commission brought out a comprehensive draft
statute for an International Criminal Tribunal and in 1994 a revised
draft statute for an International Criminal Court. The Yugoslav Tribunal
set up by Resolution 827 and the Rwanda Tribunal set up by Resolution
955 of the U.N. Security Council may be regarded as important steps, as
pilot projects preparatory to the setting up of a permanent court. Its
realisation requires a major cultural shift in the fields of politics,
law and jurisprudence. This means a redefinition of concepts so that
power, authority and sovereignty are subordinated to the requirements of
human rights. The very acceptance of the idea of a permanent court is an
indication of a cultural shift that is taking place. These developments
do offer some solace, some hope.

At the national level, we in India have not witnessed any significant
reduction in human rights violations, more particularly in areas of
political turbulence (and armed conflict) such as Jammu and Kashmir, the
states of north-eastern India, and Andhra Pradesh. In Bihar we are
witnesses to violence by private armies of groups based on caste. The
caste system adds another dimension to the human rights issue in India.

In 1997 in the state of Andhra Pradesh, after human rights activists had
battled for over two and a half decades, the High Court, in a case of
alleged extra-judicial execution by the police, or, as it is termed in
India, an 'encounter killing' of one Madhusudhan Raj Yadav, held for the
first time that killings in so-called encounters are homicides and have
to be investigated and prosecuted.[^6] Around the same period the
National Human Rights Commission of India (NHRC), in an inquiry into
encounters in Andhra Pradesh, arrived at a similar conclusion and
ordered the prosecution of police officials. These have had no effect on
the state government, and encounters are a daily feature. Neither the
rulings of these bodies nor the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993
(which established the NHRC), has made any difference. The High Court
has ordered inquiries by investigative agencies into some encounters and
in others it has directed the filing of private complaints against the
police. The Tamil Nadu High Court, in early 1997, held that a complaint
could be directly lodged before a sessions court (a lower court) which
can be nominated as a human rights court under Section 29 of the 1993
Act.[^7] This is a positive gain, because every district thereby gets
a human rights court which is easily accessible to the people. The
acceptance by the premier democratic institution --- the courts --- that
killings and torture are unlawful and in breach of international
covenants would amount to the constitutional entitlement of the victim's
dependants and the concept of the rule of law.

If governments ignore judge-made law, governance will sooner or later
suffer erosion of legitimacy, as is already visible in areas of
political turbulence. Notwithstanding the indifference of political
governments, the courts have gone ahead and are holding that
international covenants have acquired the status of customary law.

We do not hear the outcry that the sovereignty of a country is in peril.
We have witnessed governments coming forward with proposals for and the
consequent establishment of human rights commissions. The existence of
these commissions is an admission of guilt. A variant of these is the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa. They have no powers
to punish the perpetrators of horrendous human rights violations. But
they do serve the purpose of superseding the existing authoritarian
culture.

After a long and continuous innings of around three decades as a
defender of human rights, I believe that there is a possibility to
arrive at a broad consensus on this issue. Implied in this possibility
is the assurance of the presence of democracy in governance.


[^5]:
Robert H. Jackson, 'The Case against the Nazi War Criminals', 3
(1946), _cf._ Sandra Day O'Connor, 'Federalism of Free Nations', in
_New York University Journal of International Law and Politics_,
28:1--2, Fall 1995--Winter 1996. p. 35.

[^6]: _K.G.
Kannabiran v. Chief Secretary, Government of Andhra Pradesh & Ors._,
1997 (2), ALD 523 (D.B.).

[^7]:
_Pazhankudi Makkal Sangam v. State of Tamil Nadu & Ors._, unreported, 1997.
