# Progressive Decay of Democratic Institutions

> A good policeman, it is said, remembers the rules only when he is in
> the witness box. Prior to that he takes the law into his own hands.
>
> Tom Bowden[^77]

## Introduction

The time is early morning, a couple of hours before daylight, August 18, 1983. The scene is the railway station of Warangal, a town with a
900-year-old history and the fifth largest population in Andhra Pradesh.

'The express train from Narsapur to Secunderabad is expected within a
few minutes,' says the announcer. A large contingent of policemen forces
the station master to bring the train onto the last platform, where they
are waiting, because a steep descent on the other side will make all the
passengers alight on the platform. The train enters the station.
Normally full, it is even more so that day, with hundreds of students
traveling from coastal towns to Hyderabad, heading towards a students'
rally, Their demands are innocuous: higher scholarships, better library
facilities, cheaper textbooks, etc.

The policemen charge into the train, pull open the doors forcibly, and
offload the passengers as if they were cargo. They catch hold of any
person looking like a student, pull him out brutally and throw him onto
the platform. Later they will pretend that those apprehended were
ticketless travellers, but at the time they do not even try to check for
tickets. About 100 to 200 students are thus detained.

The procedure is repeated with two more trains that come to Warangal
from coastal towns: the Godavari Express and the Madras--Hyderabad
Express. By dawn, some 300 to 400 students have been collected on the
platform. They are forced to remove their shirts, handcuffed behind the
back with their own shirts and made to sit in rows. As other travellers
look on horrified, they are beaten savagely with long canes.

Public service buses are forcibly requisitioned by the police, and
before the sun can rise and look down upon the ghastly scene, the boys
are removed from the platform, marched in a file to the buses, and
lodged in the five police stations in the town. There is no furore in
the town that day, because there is nothing unusual about this dastardly
act. The next day, the local press carries a bland report citing the
Superintendent of Police of Warangal district, who said that it was
suspected that 'hundreds of extremists were travelling by the trains
that day to attend a rally at Hyderabad,' and that this was the reason
for the arrests. This astonishing pronouncement also does not produce a
reaction, as this too is not unusual. The arrest, torture and framing of
false charges against students, peasants, tribals and mineworkers, and
then labelling them 'extremists' to get away with it, is such a normal
practice that nobody expects anything different. What happened that day
was not an isolated incident. It is merely one anecdote in a tale of
barbarity that has a long history. This essay will attempt to map
aspects of that history, tracing the ways in which the courts, the
law-enforcing machinery, particularly the police, and the legislatures
have dealt with questions of repression and public accountability,
coming together in their endeavours sometimes, acting as checks on each
other at other critical moments, and yet working at all times through
the colonial and post-colonial period strictly within a colonial
paradigm.

## Continuing the Rowlatt Framework

It is interesting to look at the transformation of an Indian from a
British subject to an independent citizen of a sovereign nation. After
15 August 1947, Indians continued to be subjects, with a promise of
citizenship after the Constitution came into force. The Constitution,
when it came into force, recognised that citizens have certain basic
rights and enumerated some by way of illustration, leaving space for the
articulation and progressive delineation of basic rights in the course
of the country's development. Representative institutions were created
to safeguard these rights and other enumerated non-justiciable rights;
these safeguards were called the Directive Principles of State Policy.
The courts were meant to discipline the legislatures as well as the
executive and ensure scrupulous adherence to these principles.

In practice, however, what resulted was a mere transfer of subjecthood
to elected representatives and to the very courts entrusted with the
task of protecting citizens' rights through the interpretation of the
law in consonance with the spirit of the Constitution. This was a direct
consequence of the fact that the institutions retained after attaining
independence were not restructured with the vision necessary to
discharge the trust bestowed on them by the people. All the laws passed
by colonial rulers were retained, specifically the penal laws that had
been devised to suppress the movement for independence. Thus, a legal
structure designed to buttress colonial rule now became the legal
structure of independent India. An examination of the criminal law of
that period discloses the purposes for which powers were entrusted to
administrators with no concern for any safeguards against abuse, since
subjects could not claim rights within the colonial legal framework.

The statements spelling out the logic behind the three Criminal Law
Amendment Acts of 1908, 1932 and 1938, which are still on our statute
books, will adequately demonstrate the foregoing contention. The
statement of objects and reasons for the 1908 act reads:

> Recent events have demonstrated that it is expedient to provide for
> the more speedy trial of anarchical offence and for the suppression of
> associations dangerous to the public peace.[^78]

This act, which bans certain associations, is still on the statute
books. There was also a provision for a special procedure, which was
repealed in the year 1922.

The statement of objects and reasons for the 1932 act reads:

> The Civil Disobedience Movement has made it necessary to supplement
> the Criminal Law by means of certain Ordinances promulgated by the
> Governor-General ... Though the Ordinances have enabled Local
> Governments and their officers to control the movement, its organisers
> have not yet abandoned their attempt to paralyse Government and to
> coerce law-abiding citizens. The experience of the last two years and
> of previous movements on the same lines shows that, in the absence of
> certain of the powers at present existing, it is no difficult matter
> to start or revive such subversive movements.[^79]

The Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1938, was enacted to punish those who
obstruct recruitment to the British Indian Army or who incite the
members of the armed forces to mutiny. Its statement of objects reads:

> A large number of public speeches designed to dissuade persons from
> enlisting in the Defence Forces or, in the alternative, to incite
> would-be recruits to commit acts of mutiny or insubordination after
> joining the Forces have come to notice during the past 18 months. The
> object of the speakers is clearly not the spread of pacifism, but to
> dissuade would-be recruits from taking part in any war in which the
> British Empire may become engaged.[^80]

The Rowlatt bills were described by Gandhi as 'the unmistakable symptom
of the deep-seated disease of the governing body.' C.R. Das's account of
the politics of law and order in Gaya is even today one of the finest
expositions on the subject. Referring to the two statutes still on our
books, C.R. Das, in his presidential address at Gaya in 1922, pointed
out:

> Why are the Indian Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, and the
> Prevention of Seditious Meetings Act, 1911, to be retained on the
> Statute Book? ... These Statutes in themselves constitute a breach of
> law and order, for law and order is the result of the rule of law; and
> where you deny the existence of the rule of law, you cannot turn round
> and say: 'it is your duty as law-abiding citizens to obey the
> law.'[^81]

Over the past fifty years there has been a gradual erosion of rights
discourse in all the principal institutions of the country, and this is
glaringly reflected in the courts. One of the duties enumerated in
Article 51A of the Constitution is 'to cherish and follow the noble
ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom.' Even after
Independence, the government did not think that the continued existence
of laws with such objectives was unconstitutional. On the contrary, many
of the penal laws passed by the British to contain and repulse the
struggle for independence are still on the books today. The executive,
under Article 372, is required to modify all pre-constitutional
legislation to bring older laws into conformity with the Constitution.
What was required to be modified was not just the form, which they did
to some extent, but also the quality and content, so as to bring these
in tune with the constitutional scheme. But this exercise was avoided
because both the party in power and the opposition supporting it by
silence wanted to retain the repressive legal structure handed down to
them by the British. After all, they did not themselves experience any
discontinuity when the transition was effected. This is demonstrated by
the fact that even after the Constitution came into force the emphasis
did not shift from power to rights. Although several provincial acts and
ordinances providing for preventive detention became unconstitutional as
they were in conflict with Article 22 and were inconsistent with the
other rights listed in Part III of the Constitution, the Preventive
Detention Act was passed exactly one month after the Constitution came
into force. When A.K. Gopalan contested the validity of the law in the
Supreme Court, the debate was not with reference to the rights of the
people but with reference to the power of the state against its own
people. The discussion on rights focussed on the limitation of rights,
an attitude fostered by the view that rights had no independent origin,
that they had come into being only on account of the Constitution. It
was only Justice Vivian Bose who consistently stressed the importance of
a 'rights approach'.[^82]

The courts, even while adjudicating the restraints imposed on liberty,
did not recognise the political content of liberty in their discourses.
The failure to recognise that the Preamble and every expression used
therein, the rights enumerated in Part III and the fundamental
obligations in Part IV are primarily political concepts has reduced
rights discourse to a debate on legalities, dwelling instead on the
assumption that rights were granted by law and therefore could be
 withdrawn at will.[^83]

What was never understood was that rights are acquired and that powers
are granted. This misconception has displaced 'we the people', the
grantors, to the status of 'we the other people', subjects rather than
citizens in our own democracy.

While the executive and legislature failed to inculcate the norms set
out in the Constitution as part of administrative culture, the court,
when such matters were brought before it, was more biased towards public
order than was either warranted or good for preserving and promoting a
healthy democratic setup. Thus began a slow decay. The persistence of
the same system despite an avowedly democratic Constitution and value
system is, to my mind, an indication of something wrong with the
political administration. It also means that after Independence the
Constitution played a secondary role in the day-to-day administration of
the country. It is because of this total indifference to a document that
embodies the aspirations and objectives of our struggle for independence
that we have failed to restructure institutions in terms of the
Constitution.

This decay has not gone unnoticed. Way back in 1962, Justice A.N. Mulla
of the Allahabad High Court, while allowing a criminal appeal, issued a
notice to the Station Officer of Shahabad, Mohammad Naim, asking why a
complaint should not be instituted against him by the court under
Section 195 of the Indian Penal Code. Mohammad Naim threw himself at the
mercy of the court and begged forgiveness. The learned judge's
observations are worth reproducing:

> I issued the notice because I want to clean the public administration
> as far as possible, but an individual's efforts cannot go very far. If
> I had felt that with my lone efforts I could have cleaned this augean
> stable which is the police force, I would not have hesitated to wage
> this war single-handed. I am on the verge of retirement, and taking
> such steps for two months or three months more would not make any
> difference to the constitution and the character of the police
> force ... Somehow, the police force in general, barring a few
> exceptions, seems to have come to the conclusion that crime cannot be
> investigated and security cannot be preserved by following the law,
> and this can only be achieved by breaking or circumventing the law. At
> least, the traditions of a hundred years indicate that this is what
> they believe. If this belief is not rooted out of their minds, there
> is hardly any chance of improvement ... I say it with all sense of
> responsibility, that there is not a single lawless group in the whole
> of the country whose record of crime comes anywhere near the record of
> that organised unit which is known as the Indian Police Force. If the
> police force must be manned by officers like Mohammad Naim, then it is
> better that we tear up our Constitution, forget all about democracy
> and the rights of citizens, and change the meaning of law and other
> terms not only in our penal enactments but also in our dictionaries ...
> Where every fish barring perhaps a few stinks, it is idle to pick out
> one or two and say that it stinks. I therefore discharge the notice
> issued against Sri Mohammad Naim.[^84]

These words were uttered in sheer disgust by a judge who was to lay down
his office shortly thereafter. The matter was carried to the Supreme
Court for the deletion of these 'offensive remarks'. Justice Mulla,
according to the Supreme Court, lacked a judicial approach. The Supreme
Court was of the view that

> ... in his zeal and solicitude for the reform of the police force, the
> learned Judge allowed himself to make these very unfortunate remarks,
> which defeated the very purpose he had in mind.[^85]

While deleting the remarks the Supreme Court further said:

> It is difficult to avoid the reflection that unless an example is made
> of such officers by taking the most stringent action against them, no
> improvement in police administration is possible.[^86]

If the Supreme Court had viewed this case from the perspective of the
Constitution, its conclusions would have been entirely different. In
Gandhi's India, where we have been taught that the means is as important
as the ends, the Supreme Court was holding that illegality in
investigation did not in any manner vitiate the trial. The legal
procedure to be followed before a court orders forfeiture of life or
liberty does not take into account the procedure followed during the
investigative stage. In _Malkani_ and _Pooran Mal_,[^87] the Supreme Court
reiterated that illegality in procuring evidence by the prosecution
against the accused does not vitiate the trial. The court drew support
and inspiration for the proposition from the observations of Sir
Lawrence Jenkins in _Barindra Kumar Ghose_ (Anusheelan Samithi).
Responding to C.R. Das' contention that searches and seizures effected
were in utter disregard of the provisions of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, Jenkins, quoting _Jeemuthavahana_, held that facts discovered
by illegal searches would still be admissible against the accused
despite the illegality.[^88] The elaborate procedures prescribed for
investigation and trial are there so that fiction does not parade as
fact in the courts. While 'a hundred texts may not alter a fact,'
failure to follow prescribed procedure may result in the production of
perjured evidence, and much more so in political trials. Proceeding on
the assumption that the principles laid down by British courts and
followed by British Indian courts, particularly with reference to the
Indian Evidence Act, were correct, the judiciary sidestepped a critical
examination of the whole question in terms of the constitutional value
system. This laxity of procedure led to arbitrariness and inefficiency
in administration.

The principles laid down by Sir Lawrence Jenkins in _Barendra Kumar Ghosh_
were merely reiterated. The question is not how the evidence was
acquired but whether such evidence was relevant and admissible. Such an
approach at once releases the establishment from the principle of
disciplinary jurisdiction implied in judicial review. The procedural
regimen prescribed for regulating governmental action is meant to
prevent arbitrary actions by the government, its agencies and men. Very
often, a procedural safeguard is the only bulwark of a citizen as a
person, and courts are places where the government and its officials are
called upon to publicly account for their conduct on proceedings
initiated by citizens. The court in _Pooran Mall_[^89] reviewed the case
law on this issue, where a reference was made to _Olmstead v. United
States_. In the latter case, the minority view (that of Justice Brandeis)
is in tune with our constitutional scheme, and it ought to have been
accepted by the court:

> Our Government is the potent, the omnipresent teacher. For good or for
> ill it teaches the whole people by its example ... If the government
> becomes the law breaker, it breeds contempt for law; it invites every
> man to become a law unto himself; it invites anarchy.[^90]

_Premchand Paniwala_ proved how wrong the court was in following Sir
Lawrence Jenkins' opinions. A stock witness for the prosecution in about
3,000 cases between 1959 and 1978, _Paniwala_ was threatened with
externment proceedings under the Delhi Police Act, 1978. When this
externment order was carried to the Supreme Court, weird tales of how
the police secured evidence in prosecutions came to light. He had been a
witness to every possible offence on earth, and was invariably witness
to search and seizure operations for arms, liquor, opium, etc. _Premchand
Paniwala_ at once demolished the logic of the Supreme Court ruling that
illegality in procuring evidence is irrelevant if the evidence is
otherwise relevant and admissible. Justice Iyer, in the course of his
judgement, was compelled to rely on Justice Brandeis' opinion in the
Olmstead case referred to earlier.[^91]

Our failure to evolve a new system of jurisprudence and the continuation
of British Indian traditions was responsible for the characteristically
colonial response of the Supreme Court to the declaration of a state of
emergency and the Maintenance of Internal Security Act in _ADM
Jabalpur_.[^92] The _Shah Commission_ findings, the exposure of the
police in the proceedings of the _Bhargava Commission_ set up to
investigate encounter deaths in A.P., the findings of the _Muktadar
Commission_ set up to enquire into the rape of Rameeza Bee, the Bhagalpur
blindings, the condition of undertrials in Bihar --- all these exposed the
anarchy and utter anomie that have set into the administrative
structure. The courts' intervention did not and could not improve
matters, for by then the inter-institutional discipline which is of
critical significance to a constitutional system had irretrievably
broken down.

The state of emergency declared in 1975 and the Maintenance of Internal
Security Act were both validated by the court. The proclamation of
emergency to contain internal disturbance was later thoroughly exposed
as an obnoxious political act, and yet it left both the executive and
the judiciary unreformed. Despite this the majority of the court
proceeded on the assumption that the people and the state's institutions
were adversaries, and that freedoms were granted to people and therefore
subject to withdrawal.

The National Security Act of 1980 devised a method to validate
incarceration of persons by a 'deemed' provision, a legal fiction. While
it is said that procedure remains the last defence of a citizen as a
person, by this act even that defence was taken away. The detaining
authority's 'subjective satisfaction' and a person's liberty are both
governed by this legal fiction. Every ground, whether relevant or
irrelevant, was deemed to be the basis of a separate detention order.
This legal structure diminished democracy. Any emphasis on rights was
viewed as supporting anarchy, and once this view found acceptance, the
abuse of law leading to violence by the state was looked upon as a valid
exercise of power. This acquisition of enormous power produced an
irresponsible and corrupt system of governance.

The courts have always acted as if the government and its men should not
be dealt with harshly, that they should be treated as slow learners. But
then, in implementing the constitutional scheme, pious homilies have no
therapeutic value. They merely tend to make the executive more and more
arbitrary. None of the courts' gentle admonitions have had any effect.
The abuse of law has continued at every level. While in other areas the
harm or injury this abuse causes may not be direct and physical, in the
case of liberty, lawlessness on the part of government agents subjects
persons to physical pain, indignity and humiliation and therefore needs
urgent attention.

Political discontent, which was genuine to start with, has never since
been examined and no attempts have been made to resolve it. Instead
discontent has been allowed to fester until it could be dealt with later
as a law and order issue. That is, discontent was outlawed _de facto_
without overtly banning the activity. After the 44th Amendment it was no
longer possible to invoke emergency provisions to contain internal
disturbance. They can only be invoked when there is a threat of armed
rebellion within. When this amendment was brought about, the obvious
intention was to prevent the state from frequently and on the slightest
pretext resorting to emergency provisions to impose an arbitrary,
authoritarian rule.

Ironically, this amendment seems to have given more space to the
executive to introduce repressive legislation without the necessity of
suspending any of the fundamental rights. The Terrorist and Disruptive
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1985, or TADA, took leave of the
time-honoured principles of criminal jurisprudence. One major
achievement of this piece of repressive legislation was that by
extending the remand period to one year, it appropriated the powers of
preventive detention without attracting the limitations in Article 22 as
also the publicity which a _habeas corpus_ petition in a high court would
invite. Arbitrary powers like this led to such widespread abuse that the
National Human Rights Commission resented its continuance and so it was
not revived. The Supreme Court validated the provisions of TADA and
ruled that, as terrorism is not an enumerated category in any of the
three lists in the Seventh Schedule, it falls within the residuary
powers, which belong to Parliament. We notice in the validation of
TADA[^93] the emergence of a disturbing trend where arbitrary laws
passed by Parliament are validated by the court through the provision of
guidelines for recording confessions by superintendents of police. Or
where the validity of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act is
strengthened through the acceptance of army instructions to
subordinates, issued with a view to avoiding arbitrary actions, as
adequate safeguards against violations of one's fundamental and human
rights.

Such a course is not authorised by Article 21 as interpreted from _Maneka
Gandhi_[^94] onwards. While judgements rendered by the court have the
force of law, they suffer from the absence of publicity and so by and
large remain ineffective. In fact, there is no way of communicating to
the public the laws laid down by the courts. The length of these
judgments and the difficulty in unravelling the _ratio_ of the case are
daunting obstacles which discourage any attempt at effective
communication. If these guidelines are to be effective, they should be
made known to the accused before he is charge-sheeted, and also to the
public so that they may know what their rights are if arrested as
suspected terrorists. Questioning the competence of Parliament and the
validity of the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, several writ
petitions were filed between the years 1980 and 1991 by the Naga
Peoples' Movement for Human Rights and others. These came up for hearing
before the Supreme Court in November 1997. The court issued a list of
instructions as adequate safeguards against abuse. These instructions
have been elevated to the status of a procedure prescribed by law, the
mandatory requirement of Article 21 as interpreted by the very same
court in several decisions.

Can instructions take the place of law? Should not a law or a rule
affecting liberty be published and made available for the public to
inform themselves? Do the judges expect the arresting officer to hand
over these instructions on demand? Mr. Tarkunde, a retired judge of the
Maharashtra High Court, was mauled for merely asking an Additional
Superintendent to name the provision which enabled the police to prevent
photography as they brought under control a hundred demonstrators. This
after he announced that he was a high court judge. These trends are
questionable because they attempt to make up deficiencies in law by the
exercise of power by the court under Articles 141 and 142.

The 44th Amendment to Article 352, instead of restricting the power of
the executive, has in fact expanded the powers of Parliament to pass
laws with reference to 'internal disturbances' without let or hindrance.
TADA could not have become operative without invoking Article 352 prior
to the 44th Amendment. After this amendment, it appears to be no longer
necessary to comply with any of the fundamental rights so long as an act
dealing with 'internal disturbance' is of limited duration but with the
option of unlimited extensions. The Preventive Detention Act has been
extended year after year for eleven years and now we have it
permanently. TADA was extended every two years for ten years. This too
may become part of a permanent penal code. The Armed Forces (Special
Powers) Act commenced its career a temporary measure but gained
permanent status in 1958.

Central legislation that can be broadly understood as security laws are
possible when the centre is strong, which in a system of parliamentary
democracy, means an absolute majority in Parliament. But now the
government at the centre is weak, with no credible politics to offer to
the people. Religion has never been a unifying force capable of
converting the entire Hindu majority into a single vote bank. As the
illusion of good governance wears thin, and people organise themselves
against this enveloping insecurity, they become a threat to the security
of the state. The home minister, as Indira Gandhi did earlier, has now
advised the states to make their own anti-terrorist laws. Thus, Tamil
Nadu passed the Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA) without allowing any
debate. This act is now awaiting the assent of the President. It is a
replication of TADA, 1985, unexpurgated. The contents of the latter act
have already been held valid by the Supreme Court. The only question
that remains is whether the Tamil Nadu Assembly has the right to
legislate the control of terrorism, as this falls within the residuary
power of the Union. The jurisprudence of power may this time yield a
different interpretation and the court may find the law competent, as it
is intended to deal with local terrorism under the ambit of public
order, which is a state subject. Under Entry 2A of the Union list, the
central government can deploy its armed forces to aid civil authorities,
but always subject to its control, upholding the federal principle.
Thus, fascism can be made a state's field of legislation.

## The Police and the People

> That the police in India has lamentably failed in accomplishing the
> ends for which it was established is a notorious fact, that it is all
> but useless for the prevention, and sadly inefficient for the
> detection of crime, is generally admitted. Unable to check crime, it
> is, with rare exceptions, unscrupulous as to its modes of wielding the
> authority with which it is armed for the functions it fails to fulfil
> and has very general character for corruption and oppression.
> \[Despatch of the Court of Directors, 24 September 1856\]

As political turbulence increases, the ways by which one may forfeir
life and liberty are likely to be more arbitrary and brutal. Cases of
torture, death and rape in custody continue unabated. These have been
brought to public notice by various civil liberties and human rights
organisations. Some cases where the people have reacted spontaneously to
custodial violence are reported sympathetically in the press.
Enlightened public opinion has succeeded sometimes in wresting a
decision from the Supreme Court after nearly two decades of
waiting.[^95]

In spite of the evidence presented in the _Shah Commission_ reports, human
rights organisation reports, and regular reports in newspapers on
custodial violence and rape, neither the Law Commission nor the
government has thought it fit to provide statutory measures to punish
erring policemen. It was the judgement of the Supreme Court in 1985
which goaded the Law Commission into action and suggested the
introduction of Section 114-B in the Evidence Act. The Law Commission
made no reference to the Human Rights Covenant nor the U.N. Declaration
against Torture, which our country ratified by filing a Unilateral
Declaration against Torture in 1979. Nor did it suggest a comprehensive
code to contain the homicidal habits of the police force.[^96]

When the police are called for an unnatural death, a first information
report is registered, an investigation commences and ultimately a
suspect is taken into custody. If the suspect survives custody he is
produced before a magistrate and is remanded to judicial custody. But if
a suspect dies due to violence employed by the police while in custody,
practically nothing is done except to secure a tailored _post mortem_
report. Under Section 176 CrPC, an Executive Magistrate, rarely someone
who is outside the influence of the police, conducts a routine enquiry,
and both the incident and subsequent report are forgotten very soon
thereafter. If custodial death is taken note of by the public, a
judicial commission is appointed, the beneficiary usually retired
judicial officer. He conducts an enquiry and submits a report. These
reports --- the executive magistrate's or those of the commission of
enquiry --- have no value. If the dead bodies have any political use, some
noise is made in the Assembly or Parliament. These deaths are never
perceived as crimes, nor are they seen as human rights and
constitutional violations.

In 1980, Arun Shourie investigated 45 deaths in police custody in seven
states. He found the patterns 'so uniform from one death to another,
from one state to another, that generalisations are possible.' The
victims were invariably poor. Several of them were hauled in on no
charges at all. Even those who were formally arrested were charged, in
an overwhelmingly large number of cases, with petty offences. In 7 out
of the 45 cases investigated by him, the bodies were so badly mauled
that it was not possible to hide the crime committed. Yet, the
explanations for these deaths were 'snake bite', 'heart failure on the
way to the hospital', 'suddenly took ill', etc. Some were said to have
'died for mysterious reasons'. All the rest 'committed suicide'. The
methods of suicide reported are unchanging: hanging inside the lockup by
means of a _lungi_ or belt; jumping out of a window or in front of a bus;
and other such ludicrous, unbelievable accounts. Judicial enquiry was
ordered in 31 cases, the results usually of no consequence.[^97]

## Conclusion

The A.P. Civil Liberties Committee and more recently the Committee for
Concerned Citizens have maintained a record of all custodial deaths and
extra-judicial killings and have wherever possible participated in
enquiries and investigations. My own experience of dealing with
extra-judicial killings within the courts and in pressing for detailed
investigation in each case has over three decades forced me to
re-examine our legacy in the human rights field and more specifically
our legacy of repressive legislation, that in a sense lays the ground
for the present resilience of repressive and authoritarian structures,
the untrammelled exercise of power and the perpetuation of impunity.

Andhra Pradesh, after Chief Minister Jalagam Vengal Rao of the Emergency
period, has been a model police state. On account of the presence of a
continuing left movement, this state has always been a forerunner in
bringing about innovative pieces of legislation. When Mrs. Gandhi said
the states could have their own preventive detention laws, the A.P.
Preventive Detention Act, 1970, legislated that every ground of
detention should be viewed as a detention order. This law was struck
down by the A.P. High Court as violative of Article 22(5). Those were
early days when fundamental rights were still not subordinated to the
jurisprudence of power. This provision later found its place in the
National Security Act, 1980, and its validity was not questioned. Andhra
Pradesh established successfully that no law need be applied to control
inconvenient political dissent. It also established yet another
principle: that the constituent units of the Indian union need not
comply with the provisions of the various international covenants to
which this country is signatory. The present legislation obliterates
Part III of the Constitution. It may go through or it may suffer some
modifications. The mind-set is what is important. A brochure brought out
for study by Andhra's legislators includes all the British laws used to
suppress the freedom struggle. While the Constitution's Article 51A
makes it mandatory to cherish the ideals which inspired our freedom
struggle, the state has always been cherishing the methods that were
used by the British to suppress the freedom struggle, and its police
have truly become the heirs of General Dyer of Jallianwala Bagh
notoriety. It is not necessary to deal with all the provisions in the
bill. One novel aspect of the legislation is sufficient to demonstrate
the fascist inclinations of the government. We are all familiar with a
legal category called a 'notified area'. But none of us may have ever
heard of an individual being called a 'notified person'. It is not
necessary that this person should be found in a notified area. He can be
found anywhere. Once a person is notified, he cannot be given shelter or
food. He cannot approach any doctor, nursing home or hospital for
treatment. His parents and other relatives become suspect and will be
subject to surveillance and repeated arrest. He is likely to be shot on
being apprehended; even the announcement that he was killed in an
encounter --- a fig-leaf legality --- can be dispensed with. The 'notified
person' epitomises and confers legality on over three decades of physical
liquidation of radical dissent by the Andhra Pradesh police. It sets at
naught all international covenants ensuring respect for human rights; it
abrogates Article 21 primarily and the other freedoms as well. And yet
it has not invited the protest it should. It is seen as a measure
directed against the CPI (ML-PW) and other _Naxalite_ parties and groups,
but that is an irretrievable mistake. No one anticipated that the
BJP-led coalition would stage a comeback as Mrs. Gandhi did, but now the
emergence of a federal structure with fascist states has become a
frightening prospect. The centre can supply forces to its constituent
units and be satisfied with a limited role. It is becoming increasingly
difficult (and therefore disturbing) to visualise a political programme
or ideology spanning the entire country, nor is there a leader
acceptable to all the people --- a national leader.

The need of the hour then is a political vision that is committed to
democracy and an institutional apparatus that is committed to the
upholding of human rights. And adherence to human rights is only
possible through an institutionalisation of procedure and
accountability. As a first step in thinking in this direction, the
following may be useful springboards:

1. The immunity enjoyed by public servants will not extend to the
    crimes set out in the penal code. The legislatures may, to set the
    matter at rest, introduce a provision to the effect that where the
    accusation is offences against the human body, no permission to
    prosecute will be necessary, and that such offences will not be
    regarded as acts performed in the exercise of duties.
2. Enquiries under Section 176 should be entrusted to the Chief
    Judicial Magistrate in the districts and the Chief Metropolitan
    Magistrates in the cities; enquiries by Executive Magistrates should
    be done away with. The latter may delegate their functions to the
    First Class Judicial Magistrates. Suitable amendments may be
    introduced to enable these magistrates to treat proceedings under
    Section 176 as committal proceedings, where there is material which
    _prima facie_ informs them that a death or disappearance has been
    caused while in custody.
3. The principle of _constructive liability_ and concomitant rules may be
    introduced so that superior officers may not join to fabricate a
    case of suicide or help in shielding offenders. Punishments under
    this provision could range from withholding increments and
    promotions to suspension and termination from service.
4. Rules must be introduced under Section 309 CrPC so that persons
    accused of offences are automatically suspended pending trial.


[^77]:
Tom Bowden, _Beyond the Limits of the Law_, Harmondsworth: Penguin,
1978, p. 95.

[^78]:
_The A.I.R. Manual: Unrepealed Central Acts_, 4th Edition, Vol. XII,
p. 347.

[^79]:
_The A.I.R. Manual: Unrepealed Central Acts_, _loc. cit._, p. 360.

[^80]:
_The A.I.R. Manual: Unrepealed Central Acts_, _loc. cit._, p. 367.

[^81]:
_Congress Presidential Addresses: Second Series_, 1911--1934, Madras:
G.A. Natesan & Co., 1934, p. 565. These statutes were part of the
list appended by Satyamurti in his Private Member's Repressive Laws
Repealing and Amending Bill tabled in the Central Legislative
Assembly in February 1936. See Chapter _Personal Liberty after Independence_.

[^82]:
_See_ Chapter _Personal Liberty after Independence_.

[^83]:
During the external emergency declared at the time of India's China
war, Articles 14. 21 and 22 were suspended. Several Marxists were
arrested under the Preventive Detention Law/Defence of India Rules.
When these arrests were questioned in _Makhan Singh_, the court
pointed out that the right to challenge validity accrued to citizens
only after and on account of the Constitution itself. Therefore,
when rights were suspended, no complaint can be made, argued the
court, basing itself on the very superficial logic that what is
granted can always be withdrawn.

[^84]:
_State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohd. Naim_, AIR 1964 SC 703.

[^85]:
_State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohd. Naim_, AIR 1964 SC 703.

[^86]:
_State of Uttar Pradesh v. Mohd. Naim_, AIR 1964 SC 703.

[^87]:
_R.M. Malkani v. Maharashtra_, AIR 1973 SC 157; _Povran Mal v. Director
of Inspection_, AIR 1974 SC 348.

[^88]:
_Barindra Kumar Ghose_ (1909) 37 Cal 467.

[^89]:
_Povran Mal v. Director of Inspection_, AIR 1974 SC 348.

[^90]:
_Olmstead v. United States_, 277 US 438 (1928) 553.

[^91]:
_Premchand Paniwala v. Union of India_, AIR 1981 SC 613.

[^92]:
_ADM Jabalpur v. Shrikant Shukla_, 1976 SC 1207.

[^93]:
_Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab_, 1994 SCC (Cri) 899.

[^94]:
_Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India_, AIR 1978 SC 597.

[^95]:
One such case is that of _Ram Sagar Yadav_, AIR 1985 SC 416. One
Brijlal, who went to lodge a complaint against a police constable
for demanding a bribe, was himself taken into custody by the Hussain
Jung police station and subjected to violence resulting in death.
The incident took place in August 1969. The criminal appeal was
disposed of on 13 May 1974. The 1975 appeal to the Supreme Court was
disposed of on 22 January 1985.

[^96]:
We have enough provisions in the Code of Criminal Procedure to
reduce human rights violations considerably, provided strict
compliance is insisted upon. They are:

    a) The person arrested should not be subjected to more restraint
    than is necessary to prevent escape (Section 49).

    b) The person arrested should be informed of the grounds of arrest
    by furnishing him full particulars of the charges (Section 50).

    c) The person arrested and subjected to search should be given a
    receipt for the articles confiscated from his person (Section 51).

    d) When weapons have been seized they should be deposited in the
    court before which the accused is produced (Section 52).

    e) The arrested person has the right to have himself examined
    medically on request to establish whether anyone else has inflicted
    wounds on his person while in custody (Section 54).

    f) A person arrested without warrant should be produced before a
    magistrate within 24 hours (Article 21(1) and Sections 56 and 57).

    g) The officers in charge of police stations should report to the
    District Magistrate or, if he so directs, to the Sub-Divisional
    Magistrate the cases of all persons arrested with or without a
    warrant, within the limits of their respective stations, whether
    such persons are eligible for bail or otherwise (Section 58). To
    this a proviso should be added laying down that where no such report
    is made to the District Magistrate it would amount to wrongful
    confinement.

[^97]:
Arun Shourie, _Mrs. Gandhi's Second Reign_, New Delhi: Vikas
Publishing House, 1983, pp. 317--321.
