# The State as Terrorist

The enactment of repressive laws does not need concern for human life
and liberty; nor does it require intelligence. All repressive laws have
certain characteristics. Their definitions are wide and vague; they are
always designed to include in their purview the entire populace, if need
be. Court processes are inevitably subverted and the much-trumpeted
'rule of law' is transformed into 'rule by discretion', which is a
euphemism for 'rule by caprice'.

Special courts are set up for terrorists, which immediately leads to the
presumption in the minds of people that the men and women produced there
are in fact terrorists. Since these courts are exclusively intended for
terrorists, they are heavily armed and the public cannot enter them.
They may not be located in the complex of court buildings. Separate
premises are hired to ensure that the litigant population waiting in the
Corridors of the courts does not wander in to watch the proceedings.
Despite this, however, there is usually a provision to exclude the
public from such trials. Well-known and time-honoured principles of the
criminal justice system may be dispensed with by such courts in the name
of a speedy trial.

The reasons for enacting such laws have always been to contain violence
and for the 'preservation of democracy'. This is as true for the
notorious Rowlatt Acts as for the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities
(Prevention) Act of 1985. Does the state really need a legislation to
curb terrorism? Or is it simply enacting a new law to provide yet
another framework within which it can unleash violence against
dissidents?

Let us take a look at some recent 'encounters' in Andhra Pradesh. In
Narsapur, Warangal district, Kavatam Saraiah, 25, of Shalevai, an
accused on bail in a criminal case, goes to the house of his lawyer,
Prabhakar Reddy. The lawyer is leaving for Hyderabad that day, so he
gives Saraiah the keys to his house and lets him stay there. Bhupati
Reddy of Moranchapalli, 25, wanted by the police, decides to surrender
in order to put an end to the harassment of his brother and father by
the police. He too goes to the house of Prabhakar Reddy. The police raid
the house and arrest both Reddy and Saraiah. They are later shot dead in
an 'encounter'. The police did not need an anti-terrorist law to take
such action. The political objective (not translated into law) of
rooting out 'extremism' seems to have been sufficient justification for
acting beyond the limits of the law. However, a periodic renewal of
legitimacy is required to maintain a semblance of democracy and, at the
same time, to ensure minimum participation by citizens in the affairs of
the state.

Modern states are the worst violators of human rights, and the Indian
state is no exception. As Noam Chomsky and Edward Herman assert in their
well-documented account of Third World fascism:

> The numbers tormented and killed by official violence --- wholesale as
> opposed to retail terror --- during recent decades have exceeded those
> of unofficial terrorists by a factor running into thousands. But this
> is no terror.[^98]

'Law and order', 'public order', and 'security of state' are powerful
semantic tools in what Chomsky and Herman call 'atrocities management'
by the modern state. These terms have never yet been defined. The
Supreme Court attempted to define them in the Ram Manohar Lohia case,
but ended up describing them as concentric circles, the innermost being
the security of the state.[^99] As the court is not concerned with the
possibility of abuse of power, it ignored the reality of the crimes
committed under the cover of these concepts. Discretionary powers over
the life and liberty of people invariably degenerate into capricious
judgments by the authority involved, with no accountability to anybody.
This irresponsible use of force has become a substitute for political
solutions.

Political solutions to deep-rooted socio-economic problems have never
been attempted with any measure of sincerity. The Indian state cannot
assert with confidence that it has ever paid serious attention to the
fundamental obligations contained in the chapter called Directive
Principles of State Policy in the Constitution. The electoral politics
pursued first by the Congress and now by the Sangh Parivar have been
largely responsible for all the linguistic, communal and caste violence
in the country. The violence against the rural poor continues unabated.
No steps have been taken to reduce this violence, which is inherent in
the social, political and economic structures in the countryside.

This structural violence takes the form of unfair wages, usurious
money-lending, highly unfavorable terms of sharecropping, bonded and
child labor and untouchability. Any struggle against this violence is
met with vigilante actions by landlords and the rural mafia, invariably
assisted by violence by the state, which intervenes in the name of 'law
and order'.

Landlords control the village _panchayats_, the cooperatives
and other institutional paraphernalia of 'development'. Since the Green
Revolution and the setting up of state-sponsored development schemes,
these institutions have become potent tools of oppression in the hands
of the rural rich. Instead of modernising medieval villages, these
instruments of modernisation have themselves been medievalised.

The manipulation of elections and the use of force to contain discontent
have been the major preoccupations of the Congress party for nearly two
decades. The former produced distortions and led to the communalisation
and criminalisation of politics, and the latter habituated the state to
the subversion of legal processes and violations of human rights.

Indira Gandhi ultimately became a victim of the 'law and order' syndrome
which she so assiduously nurtured and promoted. Her death left
long-standing problems unresolved and more aggravated. The recent
detonation of violence in the north, a legacy of the era that ended,
would have normally been met by a declaration of emergency, the
imposition of which can be justified even under the 44th Constitutional
Amendment. But 'emergency' has become a dirty word. The discredit it has
earned still sticks to it. Fully understanding these connotations, the
government introduced TADA in 1985. It was confident that it would not
encounter any resistance, and in fact the bill passed without any
significant protest. The only democratic issue debated was in the
context of Centre--State relations, when a Telugu Desam leader expressed
his apprehension that the centre might infringe upon his party's right
to _state terrorism_. Thus, we have, by consensus, opted for state terror,
and have laid the foundation for the growth of an authoritarian
structure without invoking emergency provisions.

What is important about the 1985 act is what it does not define and what
has not been spelt out. As we ride into the 21st century, we have added
a few more terms to the existing vocabulary of 'atrocities management'.
'Terror' and 'terrorist activity' would ordinarily include violence and
intimidation by the state as well. But now the words have a restricted
meaning, referring only to the _retail violence_ of those who are opposed
to the established order. And that is how people will begin to
understand the word 'terrorist' in the future. These words become
powerful symbols to manipulate the public. By defining terrorist
activity in a restricted sense, the state legitimises _state terror_,
which will always be characterised as responsive. The use of the mass
media provides endless possibilities for dredging up incidents of
violence against the state and selectively publicising and projecting
these to demonstrate their senselessness.

One such example, which has influenced the views of many in the country,
was the telecasting of the recovery of arms from the Golden Temple after
Operation Bluestar, repeated almost every day on television. That
hundreds of innocent persons who had nothing to do with Sikh extremism
were either killed or detained unlawfully and tortured was never in the
news. The fact that children who had not even attained the age of
discretion were detained as terrorists for long periods did not receive
any attention until Kamaladevi Chattopadhyaya brought it to the notice
of the Supreme Court by filing a _writ_. The government did not even file
a counter-affidavit either denying the allegations or expressing regret.

The methods of torture used against young people did not come to light
until, pursuant to a direction by the Supreme Court, District Judge
Cheema of Patiala visited the prisons.[^100] These are treated as
incidental and inevitable injustices in a major operation to contain a
threat to the state. Thus, the articulate public is being lobotomised by
the state.

Violence by the state while enforcing TADA is placed in a special
category. State violence under the cover of 'law and order' and
'security of the state' has been far more extensive in scale and
destructiveness than private violence. State violence does not come to
an end with the abatement of private violence. It continues its course
to ensure that there is no protest, because its purpose is political.
The population must be reduced to apathy and conformism, because
participation in decision-making is viewed as a 'threat to democracy'.
Whether the state will succeed in this effort is another matter.

Human rights violations of the most abominable kind take place in this
country. No union or group maintains its statistics. Killing in fake
'encounters', deaths in police custody, custodial violence, rape, torture,
the blinding of suspects and illegal detention are crimes not taken note
of, or if noticed, are handled with clinical detachment. A state that
responds to terrorist violence with speed has never corrected the
lawlessness of its own law-enforcing agencies. On the contrary, it
confers awards and distributes rewards to the perpetrators of this
violence. The security of the state, which TADA seeks to ensure, seems
incompatible with the stability of the people.

The state has not been particularly concerned with terrorist crime
proper, nor has it been concerned with broad terrorist programmes or
specific deeds. The 'terrorist' has been far more important as a bogeyman.
Once having created the scare, it is tempting to extend it to legitimate
activities. Hysteria about dissidence becomes so great that those
honestly protesting against the abuse of TADA can be accused of being
terrorists.

This is already taking place in Andhra Pradesh. Civil liberties
activists who protest against the lawless conduct of the police are
branded as _Naxalites_. They are arrested and intimidated and charged with
supporting criminals and murderers. By doing this, the state is
attempting to enlist public support for its activities, deliberately
sidestepping the real issue, namely, whether the police are entitled to
act as self-appointed executioners and dispensers of justice.

Panic, fear and violence have always been the breeding ground for these
repressive measures. There is nothing redeeming or democratic about
them. Justice S.T. Rowlatt, who headed the Indian Sedition Committee of
1917, found conspiracies all over the country. All forms of protest
against misrule were seen as conspiratorial and seditious.

Motilal Nehru talked about the Rowlatt Act in his presidential address
to the Amritsar Congress in 1919. His exposition and criticism of it is
relevant to a study of TADA. He says:

> Part 1 of the Act supersedes the ordinary mode of trial by a special
> procedure ... to provide for a speedy trial ... This speed is attained by
> doing away with commitment proceedings and the right of appeal, which
> in one word means speed at the expense of justice.[^101]

Parts II and III of the Rowlatt Act deal with two classes --- anarchical
and revolutionary movements. Of these parts Motilal Nehru says:

> The fact that a person is concerned in any movement of either kind is
> in the first instance to be determined behind his back and later on,
> when his case is referred to the investigating authority, he is to be
> given an opportunity at _some stage_ (not all the stages) of the
> proceedings, which are to be held _in camera_. The unfortunate person is
> not to be allowed to be represented by counsel, he may not be told the
> name of his accuser, nor even all the facts on which the accusation is
> based, and is not entitled as a matter of right to examine any
> witness, or produce any document if the investigating authority
> considers it unnecessary. To crown all this the investigating
> authority shall not be bound to observe the rules of the law of
> evidence and there shall be no appeal from its finding.[^102]

He further asserts:

> But repression and terrorism have never yet killed the life of a
> nation, they but increase the disaffection and drive it underground to
> pursue an unhealthy course, breaking out occasionally into crimes of
> violence. And this brings further repression and so the vicious circle
> goes on. No one can but deplore violence and political crime. But let
> us not forget that this is the direct outcome of continued repression.
> It is due to the perversity of the executive which blinds itself to
> the causes of the discontent and, like a mad bull, goes about
> attacking all who dare stand up against it.[^103]

The similarity between the Rowlatt Act and TADA is not unexpected. The
argument in favour of such measures, then as now, is that they do not
affect the innocent and the law abiding. But the emasculated legal
formality of a trial under TADA ensures a drumhead court-martial, where
apprehension inevitably means conviction.

In the centenary of the Indian National Congress, there has been a
reversal of roles, and this needs emphasis. Terrorism in the late 20th
century is not merely romantic idealism. It appears to be the only way
to focus the attention of the public and the state on issues which
require urgent resolution. The modern state, particularly after World
War II, has become a technology-oriented power structure with a vast
capacity for manipulating public opinion.

Through its control over the media, it is able to maintain and protect
an exploitative and unjust system against any attacks from traditional
forms of organised protest. It has rendered all traditional forms of
protest ineffectual by its impervious brutality and Dyer-like unconcern
for human life and values.

It is this systematic frustration of legitimate forms of protest by the
modern state and its success (over the short run) in distorting and
maligning the legitimacy of such protest that leads to terrorism. The
state may arm itself with more extensive and more efficient means of
repression, and it may seek to define more stringently the area of
legitimate dissent, but it cannot contain dissent. It would be naïve to
imagine that TADA will reduce terrorism or terrorist activity. The law
may at best mitigate but can never abrogate social disequilibrium.


[^98]:
Noam Chomsky and Edward S. Herman, _Political Economy of Human
Rights, Volume 1: The Washington Connection and Third World Fascism_,
Black Rose Books, 1999.

[^99]:
_Ram Manohar Lohia v. State of Bihar_, AIR 1966 SC 740.

[^100]:
_Indian Express_, March 2, 1985.

[^101]:
_Congress Presidential Addresses: Second Series_, 1911--1934, Madras:
G.A. Natesan & Co., 1934. p. 427.

[^102]:
_Congress Presidential Addresses: Second Series_, _loc. cit._, p. 428.

[^103]:
_Congress Presidential Addresses: Second Series_, _loc. cit._, p. 420.
