# TADA: More Repressive than Rowlatt

There has often been a demand for the repeal of the Terrorist and
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1985 (TADA). Even the National
Human Rights Commission has been demanding its repeal. Governance, if it
implies justice and fairness, should attempt to move towards
accountability of the state, and any review of this act should be alive
to the possibility and the magnitude of its abuse by various agencies.
This approach entails a political vision rooted in democracy, and one
that does not suspect the motives of critics, whether they be
politicians or human rights activists.

Merely decrying TADA as a 'black' or 'Draconian law' may not evoke any
response. It will be treated as a slogan of the political parties, on
the presumption that the issue has its advantages for them. This
temporary enactment went through renewal without any protests whatsoever
within Parliament, because the opposition parties feared that objection
might lead to loss of credibility and credentials as well. Only the
human rights groups opposed this measure For them, calling the act a
black law, Draconian, repressive or comparing it to the Rowlatt Act is
not a political slogan. It conveys the quality and content of the law in
its essential form. Broadly stated, it is more repressive in character
than the Rowlatt law, which was subjected to violent criticism and
protest. It is pertinent at this point to take a closer look at our
'fundamental duties', as enacted in Article 51A of the Constitution.
Part (b) of this article asks us 'to cherish and follow the noble ideas
which inspire our national struggle for independence.' We are also made
aware that it is a fundamental duty 'to uphold and protect the
sovereignty, unity and integrity of India.' But this cannot be so
performed as to render meaningless our value system, our rights, the
fundamental obligations of the state and the rest of the duties
enumerated in the article.

TADA came into existence exactly ten years after the imposition of a
state of emergency in June 1975, and followed the assassination of Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi in 1984. The act is structured for abuse. It has
very few provisions, only about a score, but the size of the stature
conveys the misleading impression that it is directed only against
terrorists and for curbing terrorism. Terrorism and terrorists have been
so well portrayed that ordinary citizens feel that neither the act nor
the manner of its enforcement deserves any scrutiny. This indifference
has brutalised the institutions of society. Public ignorance of the law
and the manner in which it is enforced ensures and perpetuates its
abuse. The very force of the law depends on ignorance about its
specifications.

The TADA suspect is not dealt with according to the acts he is alleged
to have committed, but the politics he professes, or the group he
socialises with and therefore is assumed to sympathise with. Thus a
Sikh, a youth from the Telangana districts of Andhra Pradesh, a Tamil
from the deep south and a Muslim from Kashmir, Bombay, Madras or other
places, qualify as TADA suspects merely because of their regional or
religious affiliations. This is how TADA is administered, but these
methods will not encourage or foster the unity and integrity of India.

Let us look more closely at the act. The penal provisions are divided
into three sections. Section 3 contains fifteen independent offences.
This section deals with 'terrorist' and other ancillary acts. It is a
rearrangement of the offences against the state enumerated in Macaulay's
penal code. But when the investigating agency registers the crime, it
does not set out which of the fifteen offences in Section 3 the accused
is suspected to have committed, nor does the designated judge insist it
do so.

The Supreme Court, in _Kartar Singh_, upheld the constitutional validity
of TADA, virtually proceeding on the assumption that the act is more
fundamental than the Constitution.[^104] In fact, the Constitution
Bench did not feel it was necessary to submit the act to detailed
scrutiny. They embarked on a peroration against terrorism which showed
they had been impressed by the speeches made in Parliament on this
subject. The bench skirted scrutiny and confirmed the validity of the
enactment. Thus, conforming to post-Independence practice, the
legislature, executive and judiciary in unison mandated the 'absolute
reign of law', overlooking the fact that this is often synonymous with
'absolute reign of lawlessness'.

Section 4 deals with 'disruptive activities'. Basically, it deals with
the unity and integrity of India as constituted, obviously to discourage
assassinations of constitutional appointees (persons who while entering
office swear an oath to uphold the Constitution) and the killing of
public servants. The acts that have been defined as offences have
Kafkaesque dimensions. For instance, under Subclause 3 of Section 4,
'prophecy', 'prediction' and 'pronouncement' have been made offences. In
other words, the astrologers that our cabinet members frequent may
qualify for being contingent terrorists should they dilate on the
members' longevity.

Section 5 of the act declares that persons who are in possession of
arms, ammunition, bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances
unauthorisedly in a 'notified area' are offenders. The movie actor, Sunjay
Dutt, has been caught in the vice-like grip of this provision.[^105]
Wherever this act has been invoked, the entire area has been declared
'notified'. A country-made bomb or a gun or a gelatine stick can easily be
planted and the seizure effected. Once this is achieved, the accused has
no chance to come out on bail. This provision has been extensively
abused. The Supreme Court ruled in the Sanjay Dutt case that mere
'conscious possession' is sufficient to shift the burden onto the accused.
What is 'conscious possession'? One does not find any light thrown on this
aspect. Of course, the learned judges, in their mercy, have granted the
accused the liberty of leading the defence's evidence.

Section 16 enables the prosecution to conceal the identities of
witnesses produced against a person accused under the act. This is on
the ground that witnesses will be afraid to depose against a terrorist.
That witnesses against police atrocities are equally afraid to depose
against the police is easily forgotten. While such assumptions are made
with reference to terrorists, a similar assumption, though none the less
real is not available for defence witnesses against the police. The
right to lead defence evidence against the accusation so quickly
conceded by the learned judges remains only a theoretical possibility
and is illusory.

These provisions and the words used in them are born of a paranoid
response by the government to the dissidence for which it is
responsible. This kind of response is neither effective nor efficient.
This is exemplified by the trial of Jinda and Sukha for the killing of
General Vaidya. Despite (or perhaps because of) the blanket powers
entrusted to the investigating agency, the entire evidence produced by
the prosecution to prove a 'terrorist act' was disbelieved by the
designated judge who tried the case. This evidence included a photograph
of one of the accused which bore no resemblance to him. Both were
convicted and sentenced to death on their own statements, not for an
offence under TADA but for murder under Section 302 IPC. This example
provides sufficient reasons for repealing the act.[^106]

The act itself does not provide any procedure for conduct of cases up to
the trial stage. The Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) generally has no
application. In these circumstances, each designated judge evolves his
own procedure, but as he is accustomed to it, this follows the CrPC
route. This does not mean that the procedure set down in the CrPC is in
tune with Article 21 as defined by the Supreme Court in _Maneka
Gandhi_.[^107] It still suffers from a colonial hangover. If Article 21
is to be a reality, the procedure prescribed by law should be made known
to the accused from the time of the initial accusation and arrest up to
the end. Even a copy of the First Information Report (FIR) is not made
available to the accused on his arrest and production before the court
for purposes of remand. He is also not supplied with a copy of the
remand report, which details the progress of the investigation, and is
filed in court every time the accused is produced for extending judicial
remand.

In a case under TADA, the accused is kept in the dark about the facts
which led to his arrest, except for the 'seizures' recorded in his
presence, which are never voluntary. The remand period was originally
one year. Under amendments introduced by Act 43 of 1993, this period was
not reduced. Instead, there was an initial period of 180 days within
which the charge-sheet had to be filed, with the discretion left to the
judge for further extension, subject to the overall period of one year.
If the prosecution did not file before the 180th day, the accused had an
indefeasible right to be released on bail. However, the amended
provision further states that if it is not possible to complete the
investigation within the given period, the designated court can extend
the period up to one year, on a report of the public prosecutor
indicating the progress of the investigation and the specific reasons
for detaining the accused beyond 180 days. This provision was first
interpreted by Justice Anand and another judge of the Supreme Court as
including notice to the accused on the filing of such a report.[^108]
That bench also held that the public prosecutor should prepare a report
independently, and not merely forward that of the investigating agency.

This progressive rendering of the law that gave the accused an
opportunity to be heard before extension of remand after the initial 180
days, was watered down by a later Constitution Bench in Sunjay Dutt's
case, which held that specific notice in writing was not necessary, as
the accused would in any event be produced before the court for further
extension of the remand period, which by itself would constitute
notice![^109] A statement made in their capacity as law-givers rather
than as judges functioning under a constitutional value system! Very
often, the accused is not produced for various reasons, and now the
accused is not even entitled to a copy of the report in order to contest
the extension.

How this provision is abused is an interesting study in itself. After
the completion of 180 days, when the accused is brought before the
judge, the latter seldom informs him that his 180 days are over and that
he can apply for release on bail. Even if the accused does file an
application, the procedure is to grant the prosecution time to file its
reply. The process actually undergoes a few more adjournments while
waiting for the prosecution to file its counter. After a few such
adjournments, the prosecution lodges in the court some sort of a
charge-sheet. This is just a formal compliance with the provisions and
is intended to defeat the right of the accused to be enlarged on bail.
The charge-sheet so filed is very often returned for rectification of
defects and for proper compliance with the provisions of the act. Thus
the charge-sheet makes its exit and is not made available to the court
and the question of the accused securing copies of it does not arise.
This is not taken serious note of by the designated judges because they
have always held the view that in a criminal trial the prosecution
enjoys a preferred position. Needless to say, the accused remains a
helpless spectator to this kind of abuse of process, which is, however,
not seen by the other participants as an abuse, including by the judge.

The net result is that the accused is kept in the dark about his
detention for the first 180 days, and thereafter, if a chargesheet is
filed, the question of the accused managing to get out on bail till the
completion of trial is impossible. Thus the accused, though he is
acquitted in most cases, is pre-emptively punished by incarceration
during the remand period and until acquittal, a period most times being
nothing less than two to three years.

The prescription of a remand period, Machiavellian in its conception, is
the most disingenuous achievement of this enactment. Section 167 of the
Criminal Procedure Code is by reference incorporated into the act and
modified. Originally, a remand period of one year was introduced. This
really did not receive the attention and scrutiny it deserved. It was
always presumed that it was just a procedure prescribed for the trial of
a terrorist. But then it was noticed that this remand period of a year
was, in effect, akin to introducing the provisions of preventive
detention laws through the back door.

The practice of using preventive detention having come in for severe
criticism thanks to Emergency abuses, arrest under TADA is infinitely
more advantageous and less bothersome than say, the National Security
Act. For under a preventive detention law, a person cannot be detained
beyond a period of three months without referring the case to a duly
constituted advisory board, which has the authority to release the
detainee if the grounds are irrelevant. The detainee also has a right to
represent against his detention. And the entire proceedings, including
the grounds of his detention, are subject to judicial review by the High
Court and the Supreme Court under Articles 226 and 32, respectively. The
maximum period of detention cannot be for more than a year.

This elaborate system of checks and accountability is totally avoided by
a mere amendment of Section 167 of the Criminal Procedure Code as
applicable to TADA. The total period of pre-trial detentions is one
year. This is not subject to judicial review. As no material has been
made available, the accused has to wait 180 days to even know why he has
been arrested. Even at the end of this period, he is not entitled to
notice or a copy of the public prosecutor's report. The right to life of
the accused is litigated between the court and the prosecution; the
accused has no role to play, and the entire process is hidden from
public scrutiny and debate, an important check in democratic systems.

Prosecution under TADA seldom leads to the filing of writs of _habeas
corpus_ in the high courts, where the proceedings are highly visible and
will sooner or later attract media attention. With a view to avoiding
such a situation, the act has eliminated the jurisdiction of the high
courts totally by excluding the application of the Criminal Procedure
Code. Appeals are only to the Supreme Court, and there is no appeal
against interlocutory orders. The Supreme Court has ruled that orders on
bail applications are interlocutory orders. They hold on to this
position despite patent perversity in the orders of the designated
courts. Only in rare cases can the accused invoke the powers of the High
Court under Article 226. By a mere statute and by interpretation, the
powers we have under Articles 226 and 227 have suffered unwarranted
diminution.

District and sessions judges are the _designated judges_ under the act.
Consequently, no one notices the way the act is being administered.
Cases in _designated courts_ are not covered by the press unless a
Kondapalli Seetharamaiah figures as the accused.[^110] The prosecution
in _designated courts_ is spread all over the state. Even if local
newspapers cover the case, it may not be news for the major media, so
the abuse, though present, is invisible.

The day-to-day work of a sessions judge does not train him to comprehend
semantic distinctions and constitutional questions of law. This is not a
criticism against members of the subordinate judiciary but against a
system which does not equip them with the ability to understand and
implement the constitutional value system in their day-to-day
administration of justice. In a Draconian measure such as TADA, one
would have expected a government under a constitutional system to set
down meticulously the qualifications necessary for being appointed as a
_designated judge_, particularly when the first and only appellate court
is the Supreme Court. Under this act, a fresh promotee who has spent one
day as a sessions judge is eligible for being appointed as a _designated
judge_. No order passed by him at the interlocutory stage is subject to
judicial review. Only in the rarest of cases can high courts deliberate
on the Constitution, says the Supreme Court.

Punishments under TADA are equally arbitrary and harsh. Excepting a
terrorist act resulting in death, all other offences are punishable with
a term of imprisonment ranging from five years to life. The designated
judge has the discretion to pass sentences of over five years, say ten,
thirty, forty or fifty years, depending on the judge's assessment of the
longevity of the accused standing trial.

Apart from this, as the Criminal Procedure Code is not followed under
TADA unless specifically made applicable, if an accused is found guilty
of more than one offence, the court can sentence him _severally_. As a
designated judge is not empowered to direct the sentences to run
concurrently, the accused will have to suffer the sentences
consecutively. Such prolonged periods of incarceration reminds one of
the Bastille. They can only lead to jail breaks and violence within
jails.

The act cannot really be retained with cosmetic embellishments. In any
event, the history of amendments to this statute informs us that every
subsequent change has made the act more repressive and regressive.

TADA has, for the first time since Independence, made confession to a
police officer (not below the rank of a superintendent of police)
admissible in evidence. This is a major departure from accepted tenets
of criminal jurisprudence banning admissibility of such confessions. The
provision dealing with admissibility of confessions made to police
officers was introduced by the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, after the
report of the _Madras Commission_ which enquired into police abuses. Here
there is a reversal. Notwithstanding the _Shah Commission_ revelations and
constant exposure of police atrocities in the media, the police has been
entrusted the power of recording admissible confessions. In _Kartar Singh_
the Supreme Court set down guidelines, to be promulgated as rules, to
prevent abuse of these powers by the police. But these guidelines have
still not been noticed by the executive.[^111] Section 21 raised
certain presumptions against the other accused in this case. The
superintendent of police was entrusted with the power to record
confessions, which were exercised by the magistrate. This is how the
principle of separation of the judiciary from the executive as set out
in the Directives, is being honored.

The 1993 amendment to TADA made it even more repressive and arbitrary.
The superintendent of police became the authority who could _approve_ the
introduction of TADA provisions in his First Information Report. A
police commissioner or inspector general were given the power to
_sanction prosecution_ under the act, thus dispensing with the supervisory
jurisdiction hitherto exercised by the government. If the power to
appoint a _designated judge_ is also entrusted to a director general of
police, the picture will be complete.

Basically a political measure, TADA was invoked to deal with the
situation in Punjab, and was later extended to Kashmir, Andhra and
Assam, and to counter the LTTE in Tamil Nadu and the Muslims after the
demolition of the Babri Masjid. The government systematically abuses the
act and uses it to shield state atrocity. As the legal structure gets
more rigid and arbitrary, the resistance to it gives up democratic forms
of protest, and laws devised to control such resistance movements serve
to drive them underground. The escalation of terrorism is in direct
proportion to increased repression. When all avenues of negotiation,
reconciliation and redress are closed, violence becomes endemic, and
neither TADA nor any other penal measures will help the government cope
with or resolve the issues confronting our society. We need to confront
not only violence but our role in exacerbating the violence. The repeal
of repressive measures is tied to the political will to promote
constitutional goals. The repeal of TADA would be a reversal of a policy
that has dragged the country down from its position as one of the
world's best democracies, to an authoritarian regime that is impervious
to the will of the people.


[^104]:
_Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab_, 1994 SCC (Cri) 899.

[^105]:
_See_ Chapter _Granting the Freedom to Misuse Freedom: Secularism and Minority Rights_.

[^106]:
_See also_ Chapter _Crime and Punishment_.

[^107]:
_Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India_, AIR 1978 SC 597.

[^108]:
_Hitendra Thakur v. State of Maharashtra_, AIR 1994 SC 2623.

[^109]:
_Sanjay Dutt v. State through CBI_, Bombay. (1994) 5 SCC 410.

[^110]:
Kondapalli Seetharamaiah was a well-known communist leader in Andhra
Pradesh and founder of the _Naxalite_ group, CPI (ML--People's War).

[^111]:
_Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab_, 1994 SCC (Cri) 899.
