# Crime and Punishment

On the morning of 10 August 1986, General A.S. Vaidya, the Chief of the
Armed Forces, who had 'flushed' the militants out of the Golden Temple
in Amritsar, was shot dead by two militants in broad daylight in Pune as
he drove his car. He had gone out shopping. His wife, seated beside him,
also sustained injuries. The bodyguard sitting in the rear seat was a
helpless witness to the attack. Riding a red motorbike, the gunmen came
abreast of the car on the driver's side and the pillion rider pumped
three bullets into Vaidya at close range. The assailants were later
identified as Sukhdev Singh (Sukha) and Harjinder Singh (Jinda). They
and three others were charge-sheeted on 14 August 1987 for offences
under Section 120B (conspiracy), 302 (murder), 307 (attempt to murder),
212 (harbouring an offender), 465, 468, 471D (offences of forgery and
the use of such documents of the Indian Penal Code, and Sections 3 and 4
of TADA, 1985. Earlier, Indira Gandhi's assassination had been the
immediate sequel to Operation Bluestar against the Golden Temple, which
General Vaidya had commanded. Satwant Singh (mainly on his own
confession) and Kehar Singh were hanged subsequently on charges of
conspiracy in the latter case.

The Vaidya judgment of the Supreme Court shows that around 200 witnesses
were examined and about 1,000 documents were exhibited. Figuring as
witnesses were prostitutes with whom the accused were alleged to have
spent time when they were not plotting to kill the general. The
propaganda against political dissent is never complete unless dissenters
are portrayed as completely degenerate. The conviction and sentence were
not based on the evidence produced by the prosecution. Even the
photograph of Jinda produced by the prosecution was rejected by the
designated court. The judge said:

> Firstly, in my opinion, this photograph does not appear to be that of
> Harjinder Singh alias Jinda ... at all ... How can I hold that this is
> the photograph of Jinda ... when obviously, to the naked eye, it does
> not look similar to the face of Jinda ... [^112]

But then how were they convicted and sentenced to death? Jinda and Sukha
argued for their own execution. Sukha filed two statements admitting
that he killed Vaidya because he had attacked and destroyed the Akal
Takht in the Golden Temple. Jinda too filed a statement along the same
lines. He claimed that he was driving the motorcycle and Sukha was the
pillion rider. They declared at the trial that they were proud of their
act, were not afraid of death and were prepared to sacrifice their lives
for their cause, namely, the realisation of a separate state of
Khalistan. There was no remorse or repentance. Even if they had
repented, would the gallows be deprived of the 'rarest of rare' cases,
which alone maintains it from falling into disuse?

Both of them were sentenced, but not for offences under TADA. They were
convicted and sentenced to death for murder and attempt to murder under
Sections 302 and 307 of the Indian Penal Code. Under the Criminal
Procedure Code, a death sentence has to be confirmed by a bench of two
judges of the High Court. Such is the concern shown by the law where
forfeiture of life is the penalty. Imprisonment for life is the rule for
capital offences, and the death sentence is an exception. In the words
of the Supreme Court, it should be imposed in the rarest of rare
cases.[^113] However, if General Vaidya's killing was part of a
terrorist act, under TADA the only punishment that could be imposed was
the death penalty.

They were charged with offences under Sections 3 and 4 of TADA, along
with similar and other offences under the Indian Penal Code. So they had
to be tried under TADA and not under the Criminal Procedure Code. Having
been tried under the procedure prescribed for terrorist offences, Jinda
and Sukha lost their right to a retrial before confirmation of the death
sentences. Then the High Court could have reheard the entire case
afresh, including the question of sentence. Section 10 of TADA empowers
the designated court constituted under the act to try any other offence
that is connected with those triable under TADA, and if such a joint
trial is permissible under the 1973 Criminal Procedure Code. Conspiracy,
abetment, attempt to murder and homicide, if they are part of a
terrorist act, are offences specifically set out in TADA. Charging a
person comprehensively under Sections 3 and 4 of the act, and for the
very same offences under the Penal Code, has always been used to prevent
the accused from going free on bail. This course enables the prosecution
to avail the shortened trial and appellate procedure under the act. The
attack on Vaidya's wife and the other offences such as forgery could be
tried under the Penal Code as offences connected with a terrorist act.
But to also frame a charge of murder under Section 302 means charging
someone in the alternative, which course is not open under Section 10.
It would be double jeopardy and can only be supported by the adage
'heads I win, tails you lose.' The act, which even according to the
Supreme Court is Draconian, does not permit the kind of subversion it is
subjected to. While the Supreme Court held that this was one of those
'rarest of rare cases' where the death penalty would be proper, both the
learned judges and the designated court showed a lot of concern during
sentencing. But what did not engage their attention is Section 15 of
TADA, which mandates the designated court to transfer the trial of any
offence if, after taking cognizance, it comes to the opinion that it is
not triable by it. The case should then go to a court competent to try
it, i.e., one that can continue the trial under the Criminal Procedure
Code. If the killing of General Vaidya is itself a terrorist act, it
looks too far-fetched to frame an alternative charge of murder connected
with a terrorist offence. This course has led to deprivation of life
without following the _procedure prescribed by law_. Taking this position
is not to justify the dastardly act. It is possible to argue that the
sessions judge, two judges of the High Court and the Supreme Court would
have arrived at the same finding.

The major focus in the defense of a citizen as a person has always been
procedure, and this is quintessentially set down in Article 21 of the
Constitution. The penal law to contain terrorism is not a categorical
imperative. The act itself is temporary and its life is being extended
from time to time without any debate. But these legislative measures are
not solutions to the problems facing the country. A formal and almost
mechanical approach to such issues may lead to the dehumanisation of the
courts, a danger we are duty-bound to guard against. It has to be
recognised that we often become unwitting victims of brain-washing. This
drives us to suspend our sense of justice and fairness at a time its
presence is crucial for the preservation of a value system that results
from protracted struggle. In this case, we have manufactured martyrs for
a cause and alienated a community. It should be said that even at the
last stage there was no repentance or remorse in these two. But we must
be equally uncompromising in administering the value system we believe
in, even to those who do not believe in it and who doubt it can survive
their onslaughts. Our Supreme Court has never been able to achieve the
poise needed to function effectively as a 'sentinel on the qui
vive'[^114]


[^112]:
_State of Maharashtra v. Sukhdeo Singh and Anr_, AIR 1992 SC 2100.

[^113]:
_Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab_, AIR 1980 SC 898.

[^114]:
Chief Justice Patanjali Sastri in _State of Madras v. V.G. Row_, AIR
1952 SC 196.
