 # The Weird Jurisprudence of a Dead Act

The history of tackling dissidence and crime shows that torture and
confession have been the twin engines of the legal system. Confessions
have always been considered the best mode of proof in criminal cases. In
fact, Bentham supported the regulated use of torture to make a person
disclose his accomplices. It was the Milanese, Caesare Beccaria, who, at
the instance of Pietro Verri, an aristocrat and intellectual, wrote a
book in 1764 entitled _On Crimes and Punishments_, which campaigned for
the abolition of torture and is still considered a classic denunciation
of it. The primary use of torture has been to secure confessions from
the accused of their guilt and the names and other particulars of the
accomplices who participated in the crime. Confession has always had a
relationship with power and authority, whether it was canonical or
secular. It always emanates from a captive who stands accused of a crime
and knows what the investigation is all about. In that mental state
nothing the accused says can ever be voluntary. In her excellent essay
on the literature of political imprisonment, Kate Millet points out:

> For captivity is an absolute state. Once captive, one can be treated
> in any manner the captor chooses: this is the physical fact of
> capture. There are no guarantees in captivity: power need not concede
> anything at all. One is physically at the mercy of the captor; every
> potentiality is on one side, none on the other. There may be mercy or
> there may be none. It is beyond the captive's power to make or unmake
> any aspect of his captivity. Captivity is an entire state; entire
> helplessness before entire power.[^115]

In captivity, volition and voluntariness are the immediate casualties.
The dictionary meaning of these words seem to be wholly irrelevant when
assessing the state of mind of a prisoner in a criminal case.

The general disbelief of confessions made in captivity has a historical
justification. Confession began to be looked upon with suspicion as the
Anglo--Saxon legal system evolved beyond the absolutism of the Tudor and
Stuart monarchs and the Star Chamber. Confession, a major exception to
_hearsay evidence_, had to cross several hurdles before it became
admissible. All of these have been set out in Section 24 of the Indian
Evidence Act. These hurdles recognise the fact of dominance of a person
by an authority that represents a human collective, whatever its name.
To tone down the law's violence and make it invisible, certain
procedural safeguards were evolved over a period of time. The burden was
on the state or authority to prove beyond reasonable doubt that no form
of inducement or coercion was used to secure a confession. The Indian
Evidence Act goes even further, stating that no confession made to a
police officer is admissible in evidence. Nor is a statement made in
police custody admissible unless the one making it did so in the
immediate presence of a magistrate. Confessions made to a police officer
and a statement made while in police custody are totally excluded from
the category of extra-judicial confessions.

The English rules of
evidence had their evolution in jury trials. These rules of relevance
and exclusion sprang from the realisation that human tribunals were
fallible and could be arbitrary in their pursuit of a just resolution of
issues placed before them. Mandatory procedural requirements are a
restraint on authority, and it is these limitations on power that define
the of history of democracy and the rule of law. Malise Ruthven, while
tracing the history of torture during the British period, refers to the
report of the commission of inquiry set up in 1854 by the Governor of
Madras to enquire into complaints that torture was widespread in his
Presidency.[^116] Perhaps it was the fall-out of this report that led
to the statutory exclusion of confessions made to a police officer as
evidence in the trial of criminal cases. It did not stop there.
Statements made while in police custody to any other person were also
excluded if there was no magistrate present. These provisions proceed on
the assumption that any statement made to a police officer or while in
police custody could never be voluntary. Whatever may be the origin of
these exclusionary provisions, set out in Sections 25 and 26 of the
Indian Evidence Act, they have over a century and more justified their
continued existence. A particular justification is the abuse of
authority during the period of the 1975 Emergency as revealed by the
_Shah Commission_, and at other times too, as revealed by investigative
journalists.

Torture occurs world-wide and no country is an exception, as confirmed
by the Convention against Torture. That torture and confession go hand
in hand does not need any further explanation. An extension of this is
the constitutional principle that an accused cannot be compelled to be a
witness against himself. These ideas have evolved over time, and are
part of the effort to stem the erosion of rights by authority. This
constant tension between our rights and authority's design to employ
violence through law is reflected in the adjudicatory process. The
principle contained in Sections 25 and 26 of the Indian Evidence Act
finds its justification in the International Covenant against Torture.

But then, when a state is engulfed by political crisis, there has always
been an attempt to resort to emergency legislation, which may change the
rules of evidence and reduce the discretion of the courts. The executive
may be empowered to detain persons preventively, by making the
conditions for bail very stringent and/or arresting them under specially
enacted detention laws that covertly reverse the presumption of
innocence, the ruling principle in the administration of criminal
justice. Almost every country has witnessed this process when faced with
a political crisis. We too have witnessed it during the 1975 Emergency.
Another example is the increasing violence in Punjab that led to
Operation Bluestar and the consequent assassination of Indira Gandhi,
which in turn led to the passing of the Terrorist and Disruptive
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1985.

This temporary legislation was extended five times between 1985 and 1993. Several writ petitions were filed during this period challenging
the validity of the act which came up for hearing in March 1994. In May
1993 certain amendments were made to TADA, 1987. The court upheld the
validity of the 1985 and 1987 acts, confirming its view that the
possibility of abuse of law can never be an argument against the
validity of legislation.[^117] There were large-scale abuses and even
the National Human Rights Commission, a statutory body, complained
against the act. It was allowed to lapse, but the proceedings under it
that had already been initiated would continue to be governed by the
dead act. The desire to bring forth a more Draconian piece of
legislation as part of the permanent penal code may find its support in
the principles laid down by the apex court in cases governed by the dead
act.

The dead act is making jurisprudence which it was prevented by strong
public opinion from doing when alive. All these temporary laws have a
fixed tenure and all pending actions should lapse on the expiry of the
act. A saving clause, however, enables the completion of proceedings
commenced while the act was in force. The clause also makes irrevocable
all acts completed while the act was in force. We are here concerned
with pending proceedings that are giving birth to a very malevolent
jurisprudence centred around the evidentiary value of a confession made
by an accused in his own trial and the effect this has on others facing
trial along with him. Section 15 of the dead act makes confessions to
police officers admissible in evidence. This was the breakthrough the
police yearned for. In fact, the Police Commission felt that the ban on
the admissibility of confessions made to police officers was a stigma.
It was unable to understand why the police department alone was singled
out to suffer this disability while other enforcing agencies were not.
The musings of the Police Commission are subjective and have a
self-pitying, even psychopathic quality about them. As it is the people
who run the government and not the other way about, it is necessary now
and then to remind ourselves that the government is not constituted to
erode our right to life and liberty.

In _Kartar Singh_,[^118] confessions made to designated police officers
became admissible. But the court was mindful of the history of the abuse
of power to secure confessions. In its concern to prevent confessions
secured under duress, physical coercion and such other elements that
taint their voluntary character, the court laid down certain guidelines.
Even now, confessions made before a magistrate are subject to very
stringent tests to establish that they are voluntary before they can be
admitted in evidence. The Supreme Court pointed out in _Kartar Singh_ that
the norms accepted for recording confessions under normal law applied
also to those recorded by police officers under TADA. The accused cannot
be produced from police custody, he should be sent to judicial remand
and time should be given for reflection. His remand should be free from
police or any other intervention. The magistrate is bound to put
clarificatory questions to assure himself that the confession the
accused is about to make is voluntary. If after confessing the accused
is handed over to police custody, the inference is that the confession
was not voluntary.

But these very norms were wholly ignored by the Supreme Court in matters
which came up for hearing after the lapse of the act. While the act was
alive, by contrast, the court had ensured that the changes brought in by
it did not sully in any manner the rule of law. Despite constant caution
and admonition, however, there were complaints of abuse, and the NHRC
had to object to the act being continued. Strangely, after the lapse of
the act, the court is producing a weird jurisprudence which is escaping
the scrutiny that it deserves because the act is dead. The principles
governing these cases may become the basis of any intended legislation
to structure what is called an 'effective state'.

Gurdeep Singh, who had terrorist antecedents, was involved in a bomb
explosion in NOIDA, near Delhi, on 6 October 1990, resulting in the
death of three persons. He was also suspected of involvement in an
explosion in a cinema hall in Bidar in the state of Karnataka. In the
latter case he was produced before the superintendent of police, who
recorded his confession under Section 15 of TADA. He seems to have
admitted therein his complicity in causing the NOIDA explosion as well.
The Delhi police then prosecuted Gurdeep Singh under TADA for the bomb
in NOIDA. This bomb had gone off accidentally, although it was intended
to blow up a bus with the travelling public in it. That was how he came
to be prosecuted under TADA along with others. However Gurdeep Singh
alone chose to make an appeal to the Supreme Court.[^119]

A confession in any criminal proceeding has to be shown as voluntary
before it can be relied on to convict the accused. In Gurdeep Singh's
case it was pointed out that

- the statement was made while the accused was in handcuffs;
- while recording the confession a policeman was present holding on to
    the prisoner by his chains; and
- while he was confessing the room was surrounded by armed guards.

These aspects of the case were not disputed. The court had to decide on
their basis whether the confession was voluntary. This decision became
crucial to sustain the conviction of Gurdeep Singh, because his
confession was the only piece of evidence against him.

The court referred to the law lexicon and dictionaries to expound on the
meaning of the word 'voluntary'. But they were talking about a person
who had been incarcerated for long periods and classified by the police
as a high-security prisoner, to be held in handcuffs and chains for most
of the day, every day. Arrest and confinement would be coercive enough;
but the denial of freedom to move, the freedom to meet people and talk
to them for long periods, were sufficient to destroy both volition and
will. Lexicons will never help one to understand what incarceration is
all about and what effect it has on the mind. Classifying the accused as
a high-security prisoner and parading him in chains dehumanised him and
destroyed his volition and will. Thereafter, nothing remained of his
person that could perform a voluntary act.

On the basis of their lexical enlightenment, the judges proceeded to lay
down the law. They found that the voluntary character of the accused's
statement was not affected in any manner by his being held in handcuffs
and chains and with armed guards always around. The latter was for
reasons of security and therefore permissible. Henceforth, by this
precedent, a confession can be made before either a magistrate or a
designated police officer, surrounded by armed guards. The accused may
be produced before the authority straight from police custody, having
been given time to reflect in the presence of armed guards. The ruling
dispenses with many of the provisions of the chapter on investigation in
the Criminal Procedure Code. It will reduce the time spent on the
investigation, trial and appeals enormously. Speedy 'disposal' of
criminal cases can be achieved. The court's view of the confession was
as follows:

> Since it comes through the core of heart through repentance, where
> such accused is even ready to undertake the consequential punishment
> under the law, it is this area which needs some encouragement to such
> an accused through some respite maybe by reducing the period of
> punishment, such incentive would transform more incoming such accused
> to confess and speak the truth. This may help to transform an accused,
> to reach the truth and bring to an end successfully the prosecution of
> the case.[^120]

They recommend a legislative provision offering such an incentive. A
legislative inducement does not suffer from the same infirmities as an
executive inducement. This principle and the prescription that followed
hold the promise of overcoming disorder on our road towards becoming an
effective state. Nobody would support Gurdeep's terrorist violence, but
such decisions announce a major shift towards a regressive legal
structure, one that works against the rule of law and democracy.



[^115]:
Kate Millet, _The Politics of Cruelty: An Essay on the Literature of
Political Imprisonment_, Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1994, p. 114.

[^116]:
_Malise Ruthven, Torture: the Grand Conspiracy_, London: Weidenfeld
and Nicholson. 1978.

[^117]:
_Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab_, 1994 SCC (Cri) 899.

[^118]:
_Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab_, 1994 SCC (Cri) 899.

[^119]:
_Gurdeep Singh alias Deep v. the State (Delhi Admn.)_, AIR 1999 SC 3646.

[^120]:
_Gurdeep Singh alias Deep v. the State (Delhi Admn.)_, AIR 1999 SC 3646.
