# The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958

There are a large number of laws in operation in the field of _public
order_. Every state has its own preventive detention laws, apart from
four or five central statutes operating in the same field. We still have
on the statute books the laws passed by the British to repress the
non-cooperation and civil disobedience movements, notorious among them
being the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, and the Prevention of
Seditious Meetings Act, 1916. If these laws are all put together to
examine the extent of our freedom, one may conclude that not much is
left to the citizen. One could say that the Indian state has been in
perpetual struggle against its own people. For a better understanding of
this issue, we will now review the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act,
1958, and the Armed Forces (Punjab and Chandigarh) Special Powers Act, 1983.

These are post-Independence statutes, the first confined mainly to the
North-Eastern region. The second followed the Punjab Disturbed Areas
Act, 1983, and the Chandigarh Disturbed Areas Act, 1983. A decade before
the 1958 act, the Madras Suppression of Disturbances Act was introduced
to stop the communist movement, which was waging an armed struggle in
Telangana, from spreading to the neighbouring Madras Presidency. The
Madras act was adopted by the state of Andhra Pradesh in 1961. 'Disturbed
areas' were notified under this statute and the government began faking
'encounters' in these areas. This fig leaf is no longer necessary;
extra-judicial killings take place right in the heart of cities and
towns, with a whole population as silent witness. We now have a mockery
of the rule of law and the constitutional value system.

Such laws enable the government to impose what can justifiably be called
martial law, for which there is no provision in the Constitution. In the
'notified areas' there is no possibility of exercising any of the
fundamental rights meaningfully. The act of notification depends on the
subjective opinion of the Governor, after which he is relieved of his
responsibilities towards that area. The citizen is then abjectly
dependent upon the subjective whims of the local commissioned officer,
warrant officer or non-commissioned officer, who defines what 'order'
means in his area and determines the steps needed to maintain it. The
discretion entrusted to them is absolute once it has been notified that
the assembly of five or more persons is prohibited. In the course of
maintaining 'order', these officers have the right to use force, even to
the extent of causing death. Does this satisfy the definition of the
words 'procedure established by law' given in _Maneka Gandhi_[^121] and
thereafter? Should there not be explicit safeguards in the statute when
the power to deprive one of life and liberty is entrusted to such petty
officials? Can the power to take someone's life be entrusted to the
executive or any of its minions at all? This power has to be examined in
the light of the change brought about by the 44th Constitutional
Amendment to Article 359, which disables the President from suspending
Articles 20 and 21. When the President himself is denied the power to
take away life and liberty during a period of emergency, can a mere
public order statute entrust such a power to lesser officials? After the
44th Amendment, promulgating a state of emergency has been made more
difficult. In place of 'internal disturbance', the term 'armed
rebellion' has been introduced, and for successful promulgation a
special majority is required. Does not the Armed Forces (Special Powers)
Act enable governments to impose emergency by other means? These
questions must be answered from the human rights perspective and not by
resort to legal quibbling. Every 'public order' law needs to be
interpreted in terms of human rights.

It is now fairly settled that it is not the objective of the law that
impairs the citizen's rights nor the form of action that determines the
protection he can claim. It is the effect of the law and the action upon
his rights which should attract the jurisdiction of the courts when
asked to grant relief. The direct operation of the act upon rights forms
the real test.[^122] Long periods of abuse should be taken into
account while considering the validity of any law. Such persistent abuse
constitutes evidence of unguided discretion and therefore violative of
Article 14.

Lastly, human rights institutions should recognise that political unrest
cannot be resolved by law-and-order methods. Societal imbalances cannot
be corrected by resort to regressive penal structures, enforced lawfully
or unlawfully. Conflict resolution is part of human rights activity. The
readiness to resolve political issues will alone enable the National
Human Rights Commission to check and control rights violations. This
commission, unlike the courts, which are fettered by encrusted
traditions, colonial or otherwise, is free to formulate its own
procedure, and is quite competent to suggest ways and means of bringing
about a resolution of conflict. In the course of this process, the NHRC
is free to hold discussions with all parties concerned. This suggestion
may appear novel or impossible to accept only to those who think that an
institution staffed with members of the judiciary should replicate court
proceedings, or in other words, become a counterfeit court.

Even if the courts should declare all such acts invalid, the government
will put forward yet another series of laws which will as usual
exacerbate the situation. Political turbulence always leads to human
rights violations, and unless we address the issues giving rise to the
turbulence, we cannot bring about an atmosphere where human rights are
respected.


[^121]:
_Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India_, AIR 1978 SC 597.

[^122]:
_R.C. Cooper v. Union of India_, AIR 1970 SC 564 (called the bank
nationalisation case).
