# A Lament for the Constitution

Events repeat themselves in history. In 1967, Indira Gandhi's party lost
in five states, seriously undermining her power. In the course of her
attempts at regaining absolute power, she realised that the judiciary,
apart from being opposed to socialist and communist ideologies of
transformation, was also apprehensive about her ambitions. _Golak Nath_,
the bank nationalisation case and _Kesavananda Bharati_ made the
judiciary's stand on constitutionalism clear.[^123] Yet, she was able
to successfully shift the focus from the electoral crisis and the
consequent bankruptcy of her party's political ideology, by converting
the entire discourse into one about a confrontation between Parliament
(representing progressive forces) and the Judiciary (representing
reactionary forces). This strategy worked, as she was able to enlist the
support of a large number of intellectuals and quite a few judges. The
tactics used against the judiciary included the transfer of judges and
the waiving of seniority in the appointment of the Chief Justice, with
the aim of undermining its independence.

For a long time now, dissident political movements have provided the
excuse for corruption. The 'nation-in-danger' theme that began with
Indira Gandhi has even provided the cover for plunder. The forces of law
and order have been abused and corrupted with ease, achieving a neat
division of labour. Keeping dissidence at bay through brazen human
rights violations, the political rulers have plundered the exchequer and
resources of the country with impunity. Dubious arms purchases are one
indication of their utter disregard for the national interest and
defence preparedness.

After the Emergency period, Indians rediscovered the value of personal
liberty and began to uncover administrative practices that inflicted
misery and privation on the poor and defenseless. The courts
strengthened this effort by departing from the procedure-ridden,
actor-oriented, adversarial culture of the justice system, and thus
public interest litigation was born. The cases of the Bihar undertrials
and Bhagalpur blindings[^124] are two results of this activism that
immediately come to mind.

Atrocities of various kinds have been exposed through public interest
litigation. Judges trained to self-emasculation --- euphemistically called
judicial self-restraint --- found in public interest litigation a source
of self-expression, and discovered the possibility of making the
judiciary function in a socially relevant manner. But public interest
litigation (PIL) really did not help restructure the institution, since
the orthodox within the system were unwilling to leave its traditional
moorings.

For the people, this novel redressal mechanism has given some hope for
setting wrongs right. The succession of bad governments had anyway
driven people to the courts in search of redressal, even good
governance, in the belief that the state could be made accountable
through judicial intervention. It is in this process that the people
discovered that PILs could be used to reduce the role of corruption in
governance. Corruption as a crime committed by specific officials can be
proceeded against by a proper complaint, investigation and trial. But
corruption as a habit of governance that impedes the exercise of every
fundamental right cannot be contained by the penal or other ancillary
code. Public servants have guaranteed themselves shields of immunity of
various kinds, using both special and general laws which bar any attempt
to prosecute them: the old colonial practice of shielding officers
against the native population.

Public interest litigation enables the courts to transcend their
immunities and subject the misdeeds of public servants to exposure,
thereby compelling otherwise unwilling and pliant investigating agencies
to perform their duties effectively and 'without fear or favour'. In
short, the courts enforce the rule of law against public servants. In
this way they have exposed crimes committed by senior members of
parliament, a former prime minister and various union ministers, chief
ministers and bureaucrats.

How should a government deal with this situation? Indira Gandhi
proclaimed Emergency, suspended key fundamental rights, barred access to
justice by making preventive detention laws inscrutable, and also
mounted an assault on the judiciary. After her, even feeble governments
incapable of assuming absolute power have made brazen attempts to
exclude elected representatives from the category of public servants,
and have blocked access to justice and public interest litigation by
legislation. They invoke constituent powers and amend the Constitution,
assuming the power of appointing judges without reference to the Chief
Justice in order to rein in the judiciary. The reactions of political
parties that appear in the press indicate that there is broad agreement
in principle for the proposals made; they only object to the timing.

The judiciary too has blocked all measures aimed at realising the
Directive Principles of State Policy at various tiers of the judicial
system. They have confirmed authoritarian power in government. Their
interweaving of human rights concepts into the Sunil Batra, Charles
Shobraj and Auto Shankar cases,[^125] notwithstanding its undoubted
merit for jurisprudence, is like 'canonising scoundrels'. Despite such
innovative exercises, the absence of an agreed vision and a sense of
direction results in a lack of uniformity in court responses. Perhaps
this is why no chief justice has ever been able to provide leadership to
the courts. Leadership is not merely the extension of a protective
umbrella over courts at various levels or the wresting from the
executive of the perquisites needed to enhance the quality of their
lives. It means a constitutional vision and a collective assurance to
the poor that the objectives of the Constitution will unceasingly be
translated into reality. The judiciary's prescribed role is to direct
the government to work to bring about the society visualised by the
Preamble. Judicial activism is meaningless in the absence of vision. In
searching for an identity, the Supreme Court has likened itself to the
Vatican and compared the Chief Justice to the Pope. Archaic and
authoritarian illusions of this kind can only exist alongside the
frequent resort to the _contempt jurisdiction_, and the battle tank called
Article 142. The contenders for power are then an authoritarian
judiciary prescribing the rule of law on one side, and an anarchic
parliamentary system trying to establish that it can still call the
shots on the other!

Indira Gandhi wanted to exclude the election of the prime minister from
the purview of the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951. Narasimha Rao
attempted to exclude all his colleagues in Parliament and the
Legislatures, all representatives of the people, from the category of
public servants. They were removed thereby from the jurisdiction of
ordinary courts and could only be tried by a special tribunal, under
special legislations.

All institutions of governance, it seems, have ganged up against the
people. Criticism of the government or participation in protest will
lead to prosecution for sedition and other offences against the state,
or even arrest under preventive detention or a more regressive law.
Criticism of Parliament while it is in session invites contempt for
breach of privilege. Speaking or arguing loudly in a court invites
contempt. And yet, a corrupt and callous bureaucracy cannot be called to
account because the government of which they are the key players must
permit prosecution.

Ultimately, it is these various forces that have ganged up to put an end
to the Constitution, with nobody even prepared to lament its demise.
What we as citizens have really been guaranteed is the fundamental right
to be spectators, and to be taxed directly and indirectly for witnessing
this entertainment.


[^123]:
_Golak Nath v. State of Punjab_, AIR 1967, SC 1643; _R.C. Cooper v.
Union of India_, AIR 1970 SC 564 (bank nationalisation case):
_Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala_, AIR 1973 SC 1641.

[^124]:
_Khatri v. State of Bihar_, AIR 1981 SC 928; _Hussainara Khatoon v.
State Bihar_, AIR 1979 SC 1369.

[^125]:
_Sunil Batra (1) v. Delhi Admn._, AIR 1978 SC 1675: _Sunil Batra (2) v.
Delhi Admn._, AIR 1980 SC 1579; _Charles Sobhraj v. Supdt._ AIR 1978 SC
1675; _Charles Sobhraj v. Stepdt., Central Jail, New Delhi_, Air 1978
SC 1514: _Rajagopal v. State of T.N._, (1994) 6 SCC 632; _Shankar alias
Gaurishankar v. State of Tamil Nadu_, 1994 Cri LT 3071 SC.
