# Why a Human Rights Commission?

> The eruptions which are intended to blow open the rigidities of an
> _ancien regime_ take place when they have become inevitable, not when
> some bearded leader says so.
>
> Ralf Dahrendorf[^126]

The government is seriously considering setting up a human rights
commission to look into rights violations. The government is keen on
demonstrating that it views such violations seriously. Officials feel
that the reports of prominent human rights bodies like Amnesty
International are one-sided, and that there is a necessity for an
impartial body to look into these complaints and, if found to be true,
to take deterrent action against the guilty. A consummation devoutly to
be wished for.

But why a human rights commission? Are the courts, including the Supreme
Court, not adequate to the task? Is the government going to bring forth
a statute enumerating human rights and then create a body to look into
complaints and punish transgressors? Or is the government thinking of
bringing about an appropriate amendment to the Constitution, as was done
when tax and service tribunals were set up? Is the government going to
curtail the writ jurisdiction of the high courts and also prevent access
to the magistrates courts? Is it at all possible to reduce human rights
violations without bringing about a social order which is just,
equitable and humane?

Setting up a human rights commission is a major departure from the
constitutional scheme. A little history of the evolution of rights and
their subsequent incorporation in the Constitution will not be out of
place here. All of us are mandated by the Constitution 'to cherish and
follow the noble ideas which inspired our national struggle for
freedom.' All our actions in the public sphere should receive their
justification from this _fundamental duty_. An examination from this angle
will demonstrate that these steps, if permitted, would lead to the _de facto_ abrogation of the Constitution.

The rights which are now called _fundamental_ have a long history. As
early as 1895, the Home Rule Bill envisaged for India a constitution
guaranteeing to every one of its citizens the freedom of expression, the
inviolability of one's house, the right to property, equality before the
law and for appointment to public office, and the right to personal
liberty. Following the publication of the Montague--Chelmsford Report in
August 1918, the Indian National Congress demanded at a special session
that the 1919 Rowlatt Act should include 'a declaration of the rights of
the people of India as British citizens.'[^127]

At the Madras session of the Congress it was stipulated that the future
constitution of India must include a declaration of fundamental rights.
The Nehru Committee appointed by the All-Parties Conference in 1928 laid
down in its report:

> Our first care should be to have our fundamental rights guaranteed in
> a manner that will not permit their withdrawal under any
> circumstances.

The right to keep and bear arms was also included in the rights
enumerated in this report. These declarations were made in the context
of continuing repression by the British.

As the freedom struggle was drawing to a close, the Constituent Assembly
was busy using the experience of this struggle in shaping a constitution
for the country. The chapter on fundamental rights, the setting down of
the objectives in the Preamble, and the enumeration of non-justiciable
rights in the form of fundamental obligations are the result of our
experiences during the freedom struggle. The Fundamental Rights and the
Directive Principles were designed as instruments to bring about social
transformation, and the judiciary was assigned the special role of
functioning as the arm of a social revolution.

Fundamental rights are political in nature and their free exercise ought
to be ensured by the courts. While the Directive Principles are
non-justiciable, they are politically enforceable, even if not
necessarily through the electoral process. We are party to the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. Most of the articles in the international
covenants on economic, social, cultural, civil and political rights have
their equivalents in one or the other of the Fundamental Rights and the
Directive Principles in the Indian Constitution. There was nothing
therefore that prevented the government from giving effect to these, for
the government is under an obligation under Article 51(C) to 'foster
respect for international law and treaty obligations in the dealings of
organised peoples with one another.'

There is no dearth of legal provisions to check human rights violations.
Rather, we have the unwillingness of successive governments to put an
end to inhuman and brutal forms of state violence. The government,
having failed to perform its fundamental obligations even after four
decades, has no right to complain or be surprised when people organise
themselves to compel it to perform its duties. There inheres in the
people the right to even overthrow the government in the process.

The setting up of a human rights commission will not humanise the state
agencies. A political system which guards and supervises an exploitative
order cannot survive without preventive detention laws, laws to contain
terrorism, and other such laws. A system which totally sets aside all
hitherto accepted notions of criminal jurisprudence and allows its
police force to kill and maim people by torture, to rape women and
unleash brutalities on the people, is not going to call off these
operations and submit delinquents in the police establishment or the
army to enquiry by a human rights commission. Viewed from this angle, it
appears pointless to try and persuade such governments to be more humane
in the means they employ in tackling political turbulence. In fact,
public pressure may drive these governments to find other devices to
silence criticism without in any manner reducing the violence they
employ. However, it looks as though Amnesty International's report on
custodial deaths has finally succeeded in driving the government to
search for other means that would be less susceptible to criticism and
maybe even more effective for oppressing people.

Most of our human rights violations, translated into the language of the
Penal Code, would be murder, rape, grievous hurt, and other offences
relating to the human body. These crimes are committed by the armed
forces (the army), paramilitary forces and the police in the course of
both routine and other operations connected with maintaining 'law and
order' and ensuring the 'security of the state'. However, no laws authorise
the state to commit any of these crimes. They cannot be claimed as acts
done in the exercise or purported exercise of one's duties. To kill,
maim, rape or otherwise physically harm people is no part of the duty of
either the police or the army. The underlying presumption and
justification for the use of violence by these forces is self-defense.
But the legal presumption is otherwise. In a plea of self-defense the
offence is presumed. All these crimes are also violations of Articles 21
and 22(1). Yet they are not seen as crimes, nor are they debated as
crimes. Thus, crimes committed by public servants are accorded a status
which puts them beyond the reach of citizens and the ordinary legal
processes.

The immunity granted to authority needs to be dismantled, but the
setting up of a human rights commission may not be the answer. Their
crimes may be euphemistically called human rights violations, but they
are not stray acts of violence by the aberrant among the armed forces or
the police. The methods used in apprehending persons or torturing them
are the same, whether in the west or the third world. In Australia, for
example, evidence has been tendered before a Royal Commission enquiring
into the deaths of aboriginal people in police custody showing that in
most cases they are suicides. This is so familiar! These methods are
used invariably against the poor and the deprived. If the policy of the
government is to contain political and protest movements by force, then
inarticulate premises will be deterrence. If a policy of deterrence is
to be used against a political movement, a whole community will have to
be punished, for deterrence is at once punitive and pre-emptive.

The government obviously does not propose to give up its present policy.
That means the proposal to set up a human rights commission is one of
those familiar political sleight-of-hand devices, like the appointment
of commissions under the ineffective and overworked Commissions of
Inquiry Act, 1952. A human rights commission cannot resolve political
crises. Until these are resolved, violence by the state is bound to
continue.

The proposal needs to be examined from yet another angle. Why not
entrust the courts with the task of protecting human rights? Seeing the
condition in which the courts are today, many of us may vote for a human
rights commission having a constitutional basis. Before we cast our
vote, it may be necessary to review the history and the habits of the
state. When we regarded the institutions of justice as places where
justice could be obtained, there was a live connection with the people.
But when tax evaders, smugglers and such others hijacked the
institutions, and when the institutions gave priority to the disposal of
cases, the people became largely irrelevant. Insistence on form has
taken over and the proceedings have become a caricature of the
substantive purpose which was originally the major premise. Henceforth,
ritual in the form of procedure and rules has become an insurmountable
obstacle. Procedure, instead of acting as a check on arbitrariness,
operates as an impediment to adjudication and relief. This state of
affairs is a creation of populist politics, which have heightened
tensions between an independent judiciary and the party in power.

Jefferson complained that the federalists:

> by fraudulent use of the constitution, which has made judges
> irremovable, have multiplied useless judges merely to strengthen their
> phalanx.

That is how it started. Such practices have their own inexorable logic.
First you pack the judiciary with your men. Later you just do not care
who is in it. Thereafter, it becomes a free-for-all for manipulators.
Thus, all the institutions set up to protect the rights of citizens, to
check the state's arbitrariness and to preserve democratic processes are
manned by persons who are mere status-seekers and office-holders.

> There are those who practice straightforward compliance with norms,
> whether thoughtless or fearful. They lack the imagination or the
> courage even to consider deviance. Needless to say, they are not the
> stuff from which the citizens of a free society are made. They leave
> norms without meaning and drain the lifeblood of institutions ... Norms
> are separated from institutions, and the world that emerges from such
> a course combines formal compliance with a profound deprecation of all
> things social.[^128]

Thus, while weakening the courts from within, the executive kept
shearing the power and jurisdiction the high courts had when the
Constitution came into force by transferring certain defined functions.
The tribunals set up under Articles 323A and 371D are service tribunals.
Article 323B provides for the setting up of tax tribunals, foreign
exchange and custom tribunals, land reform and ceiling on urban property
tribunals, industrial and labour tribunals, etc. Once these tribunals
came into existence, the courts' jurisdiction over these matters,
including that of the high courts, is ousted. Only the jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court under Article 136 is preserved. The jurisdiction of
the high courts is getting increasingly confined to the private sphere
of social life.

The tribunals set up under these provisions are run by retired civil
servants and judicial officers. The chairman has to be a former high
court judge. His age of retirement is 65 years and that of the rest is
62 years. One has to examine how the tribunals are chosen to realise how
we have trivialised all values and systems. We find judges manoeuvering
to be chairmen of tribunals as they approach retirement. District judges
too compete for secure positions on the tribunals after retirement, as
do civil servants and police officers. Nobody knows how the selections
are made. The government is the appointing authority. There is no
procedure prescribed to ensure, if not excellence, at least competence.
There is nothing to ensure the tribunals' independence. The staffing
policy, as revealed by the respective statutes and practices, ensure
subordination of the tribunals to the executive, and so the transfer of
powers hitherto enjoyed by the high courts to these tribunals is bound
to be ineffective. Articles 323A and 323B have marginalised the role of
the high courts and also made justice inaccessible. Orders passed by
tribunals set up under these articles can only be appealed to the
Supreme Court.

Public servants and the working class will be the worst hit if the
proposed Industrial Relations Bill goes through. The provisions
introduced by the 42nd Amendment were not omitted by the 45th Amendment
for want of a majority in the Rajya Sabha. The Terrorist and Disruptive
Activities (Prevention) Act, without the aid of these amendments,
completely eliminates the jurisdiction of the high courts. Appeals
against sentence and conviction are to the Supreme Court. The remand
period is one year, and bail applications can be made only to the
'designated courts'. The people arrested in rural areas come from very
poor and backward sections of the population, In any event, the hardcore
resisters are shot in 'encounters'.

This legislative history and practice has to be borne in mind while
examining the proposal for a human rights commission. Now the government
is moving into a crucial field. More importantly, it is a field already
occupied by Articles 19, 21 and 22. Meanwhile, human rights violations
take place in the areas of freedom of speech and expression, freedom of
association, freedom of assembly and movement, and freedom to reside or
settle in any part of the country. The assertion of all or any of these
rights results in forfeiture of life or liberty, which are guaranteed by
Articles 21 and 22. If these are entrusted to a human rights commission,
the present government can claim to have achieved what Indira Gandhi
could not.

If the government is really concerned about correcting its human rights
record, it has to take serious steps to rebuild existing institutions,
namely the courts, instead of merely creating yet another institution.
It is equally the responsibility of those who interact regularly with
these institutions, such as lawyers, public interest and human rights
groups, jurists and academics to exert pressure on them. Human rights
can never be realised by the setting up of a commission without changing
the existing social order. Establishing such a commission in response to
criticism of the government's human rights record will at best be a
formal act. Rather than reducing human rights violations, it may be used
to cover up such violations. The debate on the setting up of a human
rights commission should lead to a review of the functioning of the
justice system, and attempts have to be made to rebuild our judicial
institutions.


[^126]:
Ralph Dahrendorf, 'Society and Liberty,' in _Law and Order_ (The
Hamlyn Lectures). London: Stevens & Sons, 1985, p. 39.

[^127]:
_See_ Chapter _Personal Liberty after Independence_.

[^128]:
Ralph Dahrendorf, _loc. cit._, pp. 151--152.
