# Sanjay Dutt in the First Person

Mr. Judge,

\ 

I am no Gandhi or Tilak or Castro, yet I think I have a right to make a
statement. I am not like them, though I am as well known as they were in
their days, but I am not as great. I am an actor in commercial cinema
and in the course of our calling and in our assigned roles we do portray
violence and brutalities. But that has always been make-believe. All of
us have been trading on make-believe of one kind or another. My
make-believe world was shattered on 6 December 1992 when a huge army of
_kar sevaks_ descended on Ayodhya and demolished Babri Masjid and razed it
to the ground. This mindless act of destruction led to disturbances all
over the country. In Bombay city it brought Muslims out on to the
streets protesting against this outrage, and I think they had a right to
protest against this vandalism. Like all such protests, this one was
directed against the government, with people expressing their wrath
against state-owned properties. The state police forces opened fire in
response. When a four hundred and odd year-old mosque was destroyed, not
a shot was fired. The state forces displayed exemplary restraint, the
like of which we have never witnessed in free India. I am not pleading
for the absence of restraint but only wish to emphasise how inconsistent
our respect for human rights is. In the December phase of the riots, 307
Muslims and 123 others were injured in police firing. A further 236
Muslims and 293 others were injured in mob violence. The coroner of the
city conducted 227 riot related _post mortems_ as of December 16.

The riots continued into the New Year, i.e., 1993. Everywhere one heard
of mobs going on a rampage. All of us have heard the awful shrieks, all
of us witnessed the billowing smoke and heard the crackling noise of
buildings on fire. The police was standing by, disinterested, watching
the lynching and arson by lumpen gangs harnessed into service openly by
the Shiv Sena and not so openly by the fundamentalists among Muslims.
While the Muslims are accused of preparing for a riot in the mosques,
for the Shiv Sena, _Maha Aratis_ openly held in various localities were a
convenient way of organising a riot and unleashing rioters on targeted
people and localities.

Sir, do you know that on January 22, 1993, the police reported that 456
people were killed in the riots between January 6 and 18 and later
admitted that the death toll was 557: 175 in firing, 309 in assaults,
and 73 in arson? This does not include the injured. There was heavy loss
of property. Thousands were rendered homeless, and they became refugees
in the city where they had lived all their lives.

Those targeted were not only the members of the minority community but
also persons who spoke out against communalism. My father, Sunil Dutt,
was a popular actor two decades ago, and he is among the few stars with
a world view. This drew him into politics, and he was a Member of
Parliament until he resigned his membership after the recent communal
riots. He is opposed to communal politics and he proclaimed his
opposition quite openly, unmindful of the consequences such an
unequivocal stand might lead to. He was declared _anti-national_. Of
course this was not an official declaration. There is no necessity for
one. Your stand makes you a marked man. Once you take a position
publicly, you must fend for yourself. Even Gandhiji was not spared. That
was in 1947. If my father survived this carnage, it is by the sheerest
of accidents.

It was during this period that I secured one AK 56, and I am now
produced before you as a terrorist under the Terrorist and Disruptive
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987. From the time I have been arrested, a
lot has been written about me and the AK 56 I secured. My grief-stricken
father told the press that as a child I was sensitive, and that was
seized upon and interpreted to my disadvantage. Some have called me a
drug addict; others have portrayed me as degenerate, someone who keeps
company with smugglers who are also the producers of some of the films I
have acted in. Everybody claimed they knew more about me than I do. Some
of my well-meaning friends, like Shatrughan Sinha, have portrayed me as
a congenital idiot and project this viewpoint in defence of my
innocence. Shatrughan does not realise that it is the cancerous outburst
of his brand of politics that has driven me to secure the assault rifle.
To confuse the issue further, my acquiring the firearm and my subsequent
effort to hide the acquisition is linked to the subsequent bomb blasts
in the city. Once the act is linked to the bomb blasts, all of you will
suspend your powers of reasoning and will no longer recognise the bias.

They have thus prepared the background, so that you, Sir, may adjudge me
a terrorist in a trial that is legislated to be a muted affair. The
witnesses to the muted proceedings will be the security staff, their
officers and the intelligence officers, all of whom have together
created the myth of the foreign hand to identify the newly defined
offence. Claiming to combat the offence, these officers act arbitrarily
and capriciously, usurping the powers of the judge and executioner. They
would have dealt with me no differently had I not been rich and famous.
Fortunately for me, my fame and affluence earned me my right to life.

My being in possession of one or more than one AK 56 is itself a
terrorist act. My friendship or acquaintance with Dawood Ibrahim and my
drug addiction become relevant facts to prove that I am a terrorist. You
will not entertain any reference to the communal riots, as in your view
all these riots have no relevance to the issues which will come up for
trial. In any event, the Justice _Srikrishna Commission_ is entrusted with
the task of enquiring into it. This short submission would exclude my
defence. However, you will entertain evidence to prove that I am an
utterly degenerate person, for no trial of a terrorist is complete
unless, in the course of the trial, he is depicted as totally immoral. A
trial is an exercise in media manipulation as well.

Sir, if you only leave my addiction and my sensitivity and all that crap
alone, and stand the topsy turvy Rule of Law to which you are used on
its legs, you will realise that my securing an assault rifle is a
legitimate act of private defence against the admittedly terrorist acts
of Bal Thackeray and his men. I believe chat the Right to Life implies a
right to private defence and is in specific terms guaranteed under the
Penal Code. This right to private defence is available also against
property and this right arises the moment there is a reasonable
apprehension of danger to person or property from an attempt or a threat
of an assault, and this right continues as long as the apprehension of
danger continues. During the January riots, hospitals in Bombay admitted
1,160 persons: 397 were dead on arrival and 169 died after admission;
thousands migrated and nearly two lakhs were rendered homeless. If this
scale of violence does not raise a presumption in my favour of a
reasonable apprehension of danger, God help the people who believe that
you and the others who operate these institutions are going to dispense
even-handed justice!

Sir, the January riots began on 2 January 1993, and by all accounts the
riots were not spontaneous. The targets and the areas were listed out
carefully. There was an agreement within the Shiv Sena to start a riot;
there was preparation for the riot at the various _Maha Aratis_ that were
staged. Between the idea and the overt act, several offences have been
enumerated in the Act as well as the Penal Code, and Bal Thackeray and
his men have committed all these offences. The mobs used swords, spears,
lances, knives, _khukris_, battle axes and blades longer than 9 inches and
wider than 2 inches, all of which are arms under the Arms Act, 1959.
They used petrol and other inflammable substances enumerated in the
Terrorist And Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1985. Bal
Thackeray has proudly declared that his boys were responsible for the
riots. They wanted to teach the Muslims a lesson. He proclaims Muslims
have no place in this country. He describes the riots as a fight against
injustice and boasts that the mobs are under his control. He asserts his
right to extort money. He made all these statements with impunity in an
interview to the press. He is the Genghiz Khan and Calvin of Bombay
city.

Sir, during the riots the police merely watched the lynching, looting
and arson. The power struggle between Sudhakar Rao Naik and Sharad Pawar
prevented the army from effective intervention. Respect for law and
authority collapsed and the government was stricken with paralysis, and
all written arrangements became meaningless. And the sense of cohesion
which is so necessary to live in a community was fatally weakened. In
such situations, one either submits to violence or decides to fight. My
securing firearms was an act of preparation for my defence. The entire
city was in the grip of criminals.

I bought the assault rifle to defend myself and my neighbours against
any possible attack by these mobs. This was in exercise of my basic
right to private defence. This right revives when the state fails in its
primary obligation to defend the lives and properties of its citizens.
Proof of no other circumstance is necessary to assert this right of
private defence in my case. I could not have effectively defended myself
against the mobs without an assault rifle and these unfortunately are
not available in the superbazaars of Bombay. These are available with
narcotics peddlers and smugglers, who are also gun-runners.

These few days of incarceration have made me realise that the criminal
who was hitherto producing crime, criminal law and the whole apparatus
of the criminal justice system --- the police, the courts and the judges,
has also in the late 20th century been producing politics, politicians
and the government. It is the ascendancy of the criminal over
governance --- of whom Bal Thackeray and his men are only partial
manifestations.
