# Narendra Modi's Hindutva Laboratory

> Oppression does not stand on the doorstep with a toothbrush moustache
> and a swastika arm band.[^173]

It was in the fall of 1944 that Himmler realised that the war was coming
to a close; the game was up and the extermination facilities at
Auschwitz and the other concentration camps had to be dismantled. As he
told Adolf Eichmann around this time, 'If up to now you have been busy
liquidating Jews, you will from now on, since I order it, take good care
of Jews, act as their nursemaid.'[^174] That echoes Vajpayee's
conversation with Modi, to whom K.P.S. Gill was sent instead of Article 355. This peace process was, like all such initiatives, as loosely
structured as possible, promising no redress, no justice, but an
abundance of pity for the plight of the victims of the great
'experiment' --- not my description of the macabre events of February,
March, April and May 2002. Gujarat, the RSS had announced, would be the
laboratory of the Hindu Rashtra.

From the time they captured power in Gujarat through the electoral
process, they have been true to their declaration. The BJP began its
rule in the state by removing a ban imposed earlier on public servants
being members of the RSS. The violence in Gujarat shows that the
bureaucracy at various levels has turned into a _Hindutva_ brigade. The
state was preparing the people for the _Hindutva_ experiment. This adroit
move became possible because all our institutions had been destroyed by
Mrs. Gandhi's experiment in authoritarian rule. Also, none of her
successors were leaders; they were plagued with one desire, and that was
to be the Prime Minister of this country, however long it took. With
this kind of image, the voters returned one hung parliament after
another.

In its previous incarnation, as the Jana Sangh, the BJP had no presence
in Parliament. Only after the 1975 Emergency did they join the movement
led by Jayaprakash Narayan. They rode into parliamentary politics after
the defeat of the Congress (I) in the elections held immediately after
the revocation of the Emergency, gaining some seats but as part of the
Janata Party headed by Morarji Desai. The latter was a motley crowd of
politicians who ended up giving an opportunity to the BJP to enter the
power structure. That was the beginning of their fascist manoeuvres
within the parliamentary framework, leaving it to a fractured left to
uphold the Constitution.

There was a systematic assault on the Constitution and democratic values
in the form of the anti-reservation stir and the Ayodhya Rath Yatra. In
the course of my stay in Gujarat, I learnt that Advani's Rath Yatra was
Narendra Modi's brainchild. In the context of failing welfare and
democratic politics, with no threat from leftist movements, concerted
attempts were made by the religious majority to capture power in order
to ensure governance at the centre. Successive prime ministers after
V.P. Singh facilitated this capture of power by the theocratic forces
led by the BJP. The first ten years of this period, however, did not see
the vulgar display of religiosity by public functionaries that is
commonplace today. In the context of these practices, secular values
have lost their relevance. Every caste and religious division has become
grist for the electoral mill. As commitment to social transformation
diminished, the electoral process has become distanced from the people.
What remains as campaign material are caste and communal factors, used
as strategies in adversarial politics, the beginning of degeneration.

The resounding success of the _Dalit_ movement has not helped strengthen
the democratic and secular content of our politics. Earlier, social
reforms were used to bring about homogeneity by attempting to abolish
caste divisions. These were attempts to rid society of its long-standing
aberrations, which treated a sizeable majority within its fold as
non-persons. Such noble aspirations are outdated in present-day
politics.

Communal politics has not emerged suddenly. It has been with us for a
long time, growing steadily after Partition. It was given ideological
content after the founding of the RSS. The contours of communal politics
are now clearly defined. Representatives of the _Visva Samvad Kendra_, the
RSS media cell, found fault with the presentation of the Gujarat riots
in the media. They said that the media examines one person in a district
and draws inferences about the entire episode. They gave us a copy of a
magazine they had brought out which highlighted Godhra but not the
subsequent anti-Muslim violence, although the issue had been printed
much later. It traced the roots of India's communal violence to 1947.
Their stand blocked further discussions.

We are taken back in time to Nathuram Godse, who, in his statement to
the court, explained without remorse his reasons for killing Gandhi. His
reasons were neither noble nor profound; they were limited to the
communal ideology (if communal politics can at all be called ideology,
that is) he was wedded to. It is impossible to understand Gandhi and the
vision of society he had within a limited thought-frame such as Godse's.
During the course of his epic tour of riot-torn Noakhali, Gandhi was
informed of the retaliatory violence in Bihar. He said:

> But, for a thousand Hindus to fall upon a handful of Muslims --- men,
> women and children --- living in their midst, is no retaliation, but just
> brutality. It is the privilege of arms to protect the weak and
> helpless. The best succour that Bihar could have given to the Hindus
> of East Bengal would have been to guarantee with their own lives the
> absolute safety of the Muslim population living in their midst. Their
> example would have told.[^175]

Gandhi hailed from Gujarat. What happened in Gujarat on 28 February 2002
is not just a negation of what he stood and died for, but was equally a
negation of the values we all fought for in the course of a long
struggle for independence.

Post-Independence India has not known a leader of sufficient moral
stature to effectively intervene in periods of acute political violence.
We are still to hone our institutions to respond quickly and justly,
which alone will discipline people to respect law and authority. The
judges, administrators, lawyers, the entire quill-wielding class, the
doctors and others who run this nation, as also its population, each
have their own agendas and philosophies, and these inform their
decisions and attitudes, whether in normal times or in times of crises.
The massacre of Sikhs in 1984 on the streets of Delhi still awaits
redress and justice.

There have been excellent analyses and interpretations of India's
recurring communal riots. They have helped our understanding after the
fact. The point, however, is and has always been to change what happens.
The politics of secularism has been ineffective. After V.P. Singh's fall
there have been no active and committed defenders of the Constitution,
nor has any institution demonstrated a commitment to constitutional
values. The BJP, which had nothing to do with writing the Constitution,
undermined it from within by pointing to its inadequacies and committing
it to a review.

The country has been got ready for a communalism qualitatively different
from the earlier communal skirmishes it has witnessed. This trend was
evident from the Ayodhya _Rath Yatra_, which deliberately commenced from
Somnath. When the Babri Masjid was brought down, we saw a frontal attack
on our secular values. _Hindutva_ was brought onto the agenda as a
political ideology from that time. The anti-reservation stir and
Ambedkar-bashing were a prelude to this. The Hindu religion, declared
the RSS and its political wing, the BJP, is more equal than other
religions. _Hindutva_'s first experiment registered its success. The
political agenda was contingent on keeping the temple issue alive,
electoral strength being of no consequence at all. The attack on the
World Trade Center in New York also helped this trend to some extent.
The abracadabra of the 'war against terror' found support from the BJP
government, which pushed its agenda of _Hindutva_ while having POTA passed
to simultaneously contain both Islamic terrorism and secular, democratic
dissent within. A Hindu theocracy was the major unwritten premise of
governance by the BJP.

A closer look at the violence in Gujarat shows that even while the
*shilanyas* was being debated inside the courts, preparations were
underway outside to test the Hindu parties' strength, despite their
precariousness within the electoral system.

Godhra is in the Panchmahals district of Gujarat. The Sabarmathi
Express, having carried the Ram _sevaks_ to Ayodhya earlier, was bringing
them back to Ahmedabad. They returned without expending their energies,
as _shilanyas_ did not take place. The Ram _sevaks_, or a majority of them,
must have been quite young energetic and unemployed, because these are
the recruiting bases for the VHP and the Bajrang Dal. These foot
soldiers of _Hindutva_ belong to the last rungs of the caste hierarchy.
Gathering regularly gives them not only a sense of belonging but also an
occasion for proximity and gregariousness with upper-caste Hindus.

The train was carrying around twelve hundred passengers and was
obviously overcrowded. Passengers with reserved seats had to allow heavy
entry of Ram _sevaks_ into their compartments. These people had all gone
to Ayodhya to work for the party that ran their government, that of the
country and therefore also owned the trains. That is what the cadres
believe when they go to or return from rallies organised by their
parties. There were complaints against these Ram _sevaks_ both to and from
Ayodhya on 27 February. They had inconvenienced even Hindu passengers in
the reserved compartments. There were complaints by Muslim vendors on
the platforms with regard to how much tea and eatables they had
consumed. They had also misbehaved with the women assisting the Muslim
vendors. By all accounts, there was an altercation between the Muslim
vendors and the Ram _sevaks_ at the Godhra station. There is no evidence
that the other Hindus present on the platform participated in this
altercation. But as the train pulled out, the chain was pulled, stopping
it at the Falia signal, which was a Muslim area. There was an attack on
S6, a reserved compartment. It can be inferred that anti-social elements
among the Muslims living there converted an altercation into a communal
riot. That it was spontaneous to start with cannot be ruled out. There
was stone pelting from outside. A few seconds thereafter, the
compartment was in flames. The stones would have made the passengers
bring down the shutters, but it is asserted that flaming cloth balls
were thrown in from the outside. At Falia the rail track is at a height
of around 12 feet. The compartments have the added protection of three
to four crossbars running through all the windows to prevent miscreants
and thieves entering. Once set on fire and flung in from ground level,
the cloth balls must find their way into the compartments However, the
outside of the bogey does not bear any marks of large-scale charring.
Burn marks are only found on the outer fringes of the windows, but these
could be due to tongues of flame from the inside. The fire totally
destroyed the inside of S6, twisting the steel and other metal used in
the compartment. The tragedy is that the fire also consumed around fifty
to sixty human beings, including a large number of passengers who had
nothing to do with the goings on in Ayodhya or the rest of the country.
Such crimes should never go unpunished.

The train fire raises several questions. The Home Minister was
personally aware of what had happened in the country after the Babri
Masjid was brought down. What security measures were taken to prevent a
flare-up of communal violence following the programme of _shilanyas_? It
is not a responsible reply to say that law and order is a state subject.
The Ayodhya _shilanyas_ had all the possibilities of a breakdown of public
order, but the sensitivity the government exhibits towards terrorist
violence was absent in the face of a possibility of violence by the
majority community.

After the Godhra tragedy, but independent of it, genocide was unleashed
on the Muslim population of Gujarat. The day after the train fire, i.e.
on 28 February, attacks on the Muslim population began in various parts
of the state and almost at the same time. This simultaneity showed they
had been planned long before Godhra. Chief Minister Narendra Modi
described the first incident as communal violence and the consequence as
secular violence. The latter was independent of Godhra because of
various facts that have come to light. Those who were victims and others
who were around but did not share the communal politics of the state
government confirmed the plan to enact violence. There had already been
preparations to support the _shilanyas_. The build-up of the theocratic
agenda was very open. The statements of Praveen Togadia, General
Secretary of VHP International, Acharya Giriraj Kishore, Senior Vice
President of the VHP, S.K. Jain, National Convener of the Bajrang Dal
and others in the month of February are instructive. They are
provocative; although made with reference to temple construction, the
message was very clear. Look at Praveen Togadia's statement to the _Asian
Age_ on 7 February:

> It will have to be Pakistan or the mandir. The mosque constructed by
> Babar at Ayodhya 450 years ago by destroying the Ram temple there and
> the September 11 attack on the World Trade Centre are symbols of
> Islamic _Jihad_. It is necessary for India, the Jews and the Western
> world to get together and fight Islamic militants.

Such statements always lead to the massacre of the Muslim minorities
living in our midst. In one statement the Bajrang Dal leader said that
if Muslim organisations prevented construction of the temple, the _Dal_
would chant the Hanuman Chalisa at Delhi's Jama Masjid. Earlier, this
outfit had assured the Supreme Court that the _kar sevaks_ were a peaceful
lot and would merely sing religious hymns at the Babri mosque. So they
were allowed into it, but what happened there is a continuing story!
What preparations were underway in other parts of the country can only
be guessed at from what happened in Gujarat. The scale of these
preparations came to light when the spark of communal violence was lit
in Godhra.

One example is the Gujarat government's postings and transfers of police
inspectors. As soon as Narendra Modi assumed power, inspectors were
carefully chosen to man certain police stations. He also chose the
commissioner of police. Muslim police officers were not given executive
posts, but were transferred to administrative posts. The Bajrang Dal and
the VHP, the militant wing of the RSS, had already spread their
tentacles throughout the state. They had been working among the tribals
and in fact used them effectively. They had armed their cadres, and we
were told that meetings had been held regularly in various centres.
Godhra has always had a communal history. This fact should have led the
administration to effectively use its preventive detention laws. That
course was not open because several ministers in Modi's cabinet were
actually participating in the violence and/or monitoring the rampaging
crowds they had organised. Ministers Ashok Bhat and Jadeja sat in the
police control rooms at Gandhi Nagar and Ahmedabad and directed the
mayhem. Revenue Minister Hiren Pandya, the victims say, led one of the
mobs that attacked Muslims and their property. A former chief justice of
the state emphatically confirmed the people's version by declaring that
the Constitution and the laws stood suspended on February 28 and the
following days. Narendra Modi, like the anomic man, is 'spiritually a
sterile person, responsive only to himself and responsible to
none.'[^176] He continues to be the Chief Minister.

All the attacks in different parts of Gujarat commenced almost
simultaneously. The killings also did not vary in pattern. Victims were
killed, chopped into pieces and set on fire. A _tola_ or a mob of ten
thousand chased the Muslims till they were blocked by the police from
fleeing to safety, The mob then fell upon them and killed them. A child
victim told us that he saw ten members of his family being slaughtered.
The manner in which Jaffri, Kausar and Geetha Ben were killed have by
now become household stories in the country. The assailants wore head
bands bearing the words 'Jai Siyaram'. The leaders of the _tola_ sometimes
asked their victims to repeat these words. Whether they did so or not,
they were put to death. The mobs had converted Ram into a psychopathic,
bloodthirsty god.

The violence that was enacted did not stop with just killing, There was
also an effort to destroy the identity of those killed. Rich Muslims
were killed too. The mobs had lists of the Muslims in each _mohalla_, and
also a list of their properties. Two high court judges, one of them
sitting, were attacked and their houses destroyed. They had to flee
Judges' Colony and take shelter in a Muslim locality. The Supreme Court
did not come to the rescue of these judges. Women were raped in the
presence of a hysterical _tola_. A pregnant woman was killed and the fetus
pulled out and quartered. Mob leaders identified mixed couples and
killed both. Children were not spared. The properties and businesses of
Muslims were systematically destroyed, including those where one of the
partners was Muslim. A countless number of Muslim places of worship were
destroyed. How does one explain this all-encompassing violence and
destruction? Is it possible to conceive of madness without lucid
intervals? Erich Fromm's analysis of human destructiveness to some
extent answers the question. He says:

> The degree of destructiveness is proportionate to the degree to which
> the unfolding of a person's capacities is blocked. If life's tendency
> to grow, to be lived, is thwarted, the energy thus blocked undergoes a
> process of change and is transformed into life-destructive energy.
> Destruction is the outcome of unlived life.[^177]

We have here a case where the state has sponsored, directed and
supported violence that killed more than a thousand. They have destroyed
evidence of the number and identity of the persons killed. The party
ruling at the center and the state are the same. This is a crime that
has all the elements of genocide. It is not the first time genocide has
occurred in India. The massacre of Sikhs organised by the leaders of the
Congress party was by no means a riot. The killing of students belonging
to the Sikh community in Bidar in September 1987 was also not a riot.
These were the deliberate targeting of a particular religious group.

Talking about Hitler's 'final solution', genocide, in the words of
Hannah Arendt,

> is an attack on human diversity as such, that is upon a characteristic
> of the 'human status' without which the very words 'mankind' or
> 'humanity' would be devoid of meaning.[^178]

After the second world war, an International Covenant was brought into
existence on 9 December 1948 to 'prevent and punish the crime of
genocide.' It has a total of 19 articles, of which Articles 2 and 3 are
important. Based on the German decimation of the Jews, Article 2 defines
the crime of genocide thus:

> Genocide means any of the following acts committed with the intent to
> destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnic, racial, or religious
> group, as such:
>
> (a) Killing members of the group;
>
> (b) Causing serious bodily or mental harm to the members of the
> group:
>
> (c) Deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life
> calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in
> part;
>
> (d) Imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group;
>
> (e) Forcibly transferring children of one group to another group.

The Covenant has also enumerated those offences that are punishable, and
they are:

> (a) Genocide;
>
> (b) Conspiracy to commit genocide;
>
> (c) Direct and public incitement to commit genocide;
>
> (d) Attempt to commit genocide;
>
> (e) Complicity in genocide.

There is no law on genocide at present, nor if one were to exist could
it have retrospective operation. I do believe, however, that the
Covenant on Genocide has become part of customary law, as it does not
conflict with any other existing law. Such an interpretation may help
our National Human Rights Commission to conduct a detailed investigation
into the Gujarat crimes. The facts narrated in its summary report on
Gujarat add up to a _prima facie_ accusation of genocide, but there is no
detailed report. The commission has a present obligation to the people
and a mandatory obligation to posterity to inquire into the violence in
Gujarat and record its findings so that no political party and no
government resorts in the future to such brutal practices. As part of
this obligation, the National Human Rights Commission must prepare a
'Model Statute on Genocide', including provisions for taking effective
preventive measures to protect religious, ethnic and linguistic
minorities from being attacked. This action, in my view, is mandatory,
because under the International Criminal Court, genocide and crimes
against humanity are declared as offences. Political parties may not
obey them, but the human rights commissions set up by various countries
will have to enforce them, however limited their jurisdiction might be.

After the collapse of the socialist states of central and eastern Europe
in 1989, violent ethnic conflicts erupted involving minorities in
Europe. By 1993, war in the former Yugoslavia --- in Croatia, Bosnia and
Serbia along with Vojvodena and Kosovo --- had taken a toll of several
thousand lives and two million displaced. The violence spread to the
Caucasus and Moldavia and threatened to engulf the former Soviet Union.
It was during this period that a resolution declaring the rights of
persons belonging to national or ethnic, religious or linguistic
minorities was passed by the UN General Assembly on 12 December 1992.
Genocide is the forfeiture of minority rights. The protection of
minorities is expansively spelt out by this resolution, all of which is
implied in our Constitution.

The persons who met in the Constituent Assembly knew only too well that
they had to deal with a conflict-ridden diversified society. So they
provided for secularism as a value. A major but unarticulated premise of
the Constitutional scheme has been secularism; the 42th Amendment made
it explicit. As a concept, secularism came into existence during the
early period of capitalism as a response to the misery inflicted on the
poor by unregulated working conditions.[^179] Thus, secularism
includes the objectives set out in the Preamble, the article pertaining
to abolition of untouchability, bonded and child labour, and almost all
of the Directive Principles of the Constitution. This is how the Supreme
Court defined secularism in _S.R. Bommai_, in a decision made in the
backdrop of the Ayodhya controversy. Now that all over the world ethnic
claims and conflicts abound, there is a necessity for the world body to
bring forth an international covenant on secularism in plural societies
within states. The argument that secularism cannot be internalised and
will therefore remain a problem appears to be wholly misconceived, as
also our definition that it means 'all religions are equal'.

What should one do with the crimes committed in executing their plan of
_Hindutva_ by Narendra Modi and others? In this country, the courts are
not geared to deal with large-scale social violence. Rather, the law and
the courts have reduced the entire judicial process to a game where the
major actors are not the accused or the complainants, but the lawyers
who play for high stakes. The institution has been successfully
subverted from its purpose and converted into a private enterprise. In
registering the Gujarat crimes, the first information reports, which are
basic and important documents, are flawed because the state's police
departments are associates in the crime. How can one ensure a fair and
independent investigation? Is it possible for the NHRC to get together a
special investigation team under the Protection of Human Rights Act to
file charge sheets in all the cases in Gujarat? The Muslims of Gujarat
do not need charity, compassion or pity. The need justice in all the
facets mentioned in the Preamble, and that is their right. Political
justice by prosecuting the criminals is imperative, for that alone will
ensure the Muslims' dignity and restore their faith in the system, by
assuring them that their individual and collective rights as a minority
will be protected.[^180]

A formal compliance with the law, a routine engagement with justice will
not keep justice alive. One of the articles in the Constitution says
that justice --- political, social and economic --- should inform all the
institutions of the state. Our campaign for a secular democracy should
commence from this article.


[^173]:
J.A.G. Griffith, _House of Lords Debates_, Vol. 505, c. 1331, _cf._
Robert Blackburn, ed., _Constitutional Studies: Contemporary Issues
and Controversies_, London: Mansell, 1992, p. 150.

[^174]:
Hannah Arendt, _Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of
Evil_, New York: Penguin, 1992, p. 138.

[^175]:
D.G. Tendulkar, _Mahatma: Life of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi_, Delhi:
Government of India, Vol. 7, p. 258.

[^176]:
Ralph Dahrendorf, _Law and Order_ (The Hamlyn Lectures). London:
Stevens & Sons, 1985.

[^177]:
Erich Fromm, _The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness_, New York: Holt.
Reinhard and Winston, 1973.

[^178]:
Hannah Arendt, _loc. cit._, p. 269.

[^179]:
Secularism can be defined as 'the doctrine that morality should be
based solely in regard to the wellbeing of mankind in the present
life, to the exclusion of all considerations drawn from belief in
God or in a future state.' _The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary_,
Third Edition, revised and edited by C.T. Onions, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1970. Other definitions are used in socialist thought.

[^180]:
This chapter draws on my experiences as a Member of the Concerned
Citizens' Tribunal that inquired into the carnage in Gujarat in 2002. The detailed report of the Tribunal that has been released in
two volumes as *Crimes Against Humanity: An Inquiry into the Carnage
in Gujarat*, Concerned Citizens' Tribunal, 2002.
