# We, the Other People

The saga of the other people has not ended in India, but fortunately, it
has moved to the international arena. In our country, they are no longer
part of 'We, the People', although serious efforts to bring these 'other
people', who are rotting as non-persons in an irredeemable and
degenerate caste-ridden society, to the status of persons, have been on
since before Independence. The people of this subcontinent emerged from
the status of subject to that of citizen on 15 August 1947. After the
Constitution came into force, all of us attained political status with
well-defined rights. The most articulate representative of 'the other
people' wrote into the Constitution human values and gave it a human
face. There was recognition in the Constitution that for the 'outcastes'
to truly become part of the people, specific safeguards and positive
measures were necessary. Caste was not abolished by the Constitution,
but provisions were made to treat all castes on par with each other.
Article 15(2) acknowledges the fact of discrimination and unequal
treatment:

> No citizen shall on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, place
> of birth or any of them, be subject to any disability, liability,
> restriction or condition with regards to (a) access to shops, public
> restaurants, hotels and places of public entertainment; or (b) the use
> of wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads and places of public resort
> maintained wholly or partly out of state funds or dedicated to the use
> of the general public.

But even after fifty years, the outcastes have remained 'others'.
Constitutions and Gods have always been good. The problem has always
been with the interpreters, both lay and the judicial. The Constitution
makes untouchability an offence, but it persists. Bonded labour and
child labour comes from the ranks of the _Dalits_. Both practices have
been made criminal and abolished by the Constitution, and yet they
persist. Offences against the human body enumerated in the penal code
are not applicable if _Dalits_ are the victims. The entire administrative,
judicial and political systems are still operated by the upper castes
despite large-scale movements against these hegemonic practices. A few
_Dalits_ are allowed to climb the social order as political leaders or as
judges in the subordinate judiciary, even as high court judges. In
education and government employment, the Constitution has introduced
reservation as a way of giving equality to the _Dalits_. But some
political parties at the centre have attacked reservation as the prime
cause for diminishing merit and efficiency in the administration. By
stoking anti-reservation sentiments, these parties brought down the
government headed by V.P. Singh, which stood for reservation and
secularism. The bogie of unending quotas, out of all proportion with
reality, has created hatred for the _Dalit_ community among the middle
class intelligentsia. Meanwhile, the rights the _Dalits_ have secured
after prolonged litigation appear to offer them only a quasi-freedom and
a teasing illusion that they are reaching the stage of genuine
acceptability into the social order as equal members. It is more
difficult to fight this teasing illusion than to fight downright
subjugation and the status of non-person.

In the rural areas, violence against the Scheduled Castes continues
unabated. Recognising this, Parliament enacted the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, a law creating
special offences which were made triable by special courts. One needs to
look at the practices which continue to exist and which Parliament has
identified and inventoried as offences under its act. Very few people
would have gone through the definition of 'atrocity' in the 1989 act;
nor have many heard about or witnessed the indignities to which the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes are subjected continuously, and
which were therefore categorised as atrocities. Dealing with the _Dalits_
has always been a matter of charity or compassion and never a matter of
reform or correction. Where social reformers have failed, a constitution
may not succeed unless the words in it are transformed into deeds.

Section 3 of the 1989 act enumerates 22 categories of atrocities which
it then makes punishable. Unless we read this list, we will not be in a
position to understand why Ambedkar wanted to get out of the Hindu
system, why the _Dalits_ want to make the conduct of the upper castes an
international issue by demanding that discrimination and violence
against them should be equated to racism. The offences listed are firmly
based on existing practices, so let us now examine them.

\ 

\(1\) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe,

\(i\) forces a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to drink
or eat any inedible or obnoxious substance;

\(ii\) acts with intent to cause injury, insult or annoyance to any
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe by dumping excreta,
waste matter, carcasses or any other obnoxious substance in his premises
or neighbourhood;

\(iii\) forcibly removes clothes from the person of a member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or parades him naked or with
painted face or body or commits any similar act which is derogatory to
human dignity;

\(iv\) wrongfully occupies or cultivates any land owned by, or allotted
to, or notified by any competent authority to be allotted to, a member
of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, or gets the land allotted to
him transferred;

\(v\) wrongfully dispossesses a member of a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe from his land or premises or interferes with the
enjoyment of his rights over any land, premises or water;

\(vi\) compels or entices a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe to do 'begging' or other similar forms of forced or bonded labour
other than any compulsory service for public purposes imposed by
Government;

\(vii\) forces or intimidates a member of a Scheduled Caste or a
Schedule Tribe not to vote, or to vote for a particular candidate, or to
vote in a manner other than that provided by law;

\(viii\) institutes false, malicious or vexatious suits or criminal or
other legal proceedings against a member of a Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe;

\(ix\) gives any false or frivolous information to any public servant
and thereby causes such public servant to use his lawful power to the
injury or annoyance of a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe;

\(x\) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate a
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe in any place within
public view;

\(xi\) assaults or uses force on any woman belonging to a Scheduled
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe with intent to dishonour or outrage her
modesty;

\(xii\) being in a position to dominate the will of a woman belonging to
a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe and uses that position to exploit
her sexually, to which she would not have otherwise agreed;

\(xiii\) corrupts or fouls the water of any spring, reservoir or any
other source ordinarily used by members of the Scheduled Castes or a
Scheduled Tribes so as to render it less fit for the purpose for which
it is ordinarily used;

\(xiv\) denies a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe any
customary right of passage to a place of public resort or obstructs such
member so as to prevent him from using or having access to a place of
public resort to which other members of the public or any section
thereof have a right to use or access;

\(xv\) forces or causes a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe to leave his house, village, or other place of residence,

\ 

shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than six months but which may extend to five years and with fine.

\ 

\(2\) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe,

\(i\) gives or fabricates false evidence intending thereby to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any member of a
Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe to be convicted of an offence which
is capital by the law (then) in force shall be punished with
imprisonment for life and with fine; and if an innocent member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe be convicted and executed in
consequence of such false or fabricated evidence, the person who gives
or fabricates such false evidence, shall be punished with death;

\(ii\) gives or fabricates false evidence intending thereby to cause, or
knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause, any member of a
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to be convicted of an offence which
is not capital but punishable with imprisonment for a term of seven
years or upwards, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than six months but which may extend to seven years or
upwards and with fine;

\(iii\) commits mischief by fire or any explosive substance intending to
cause or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause damage to
any property belonging to a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled
Tribe, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than six months but which may extend to seven years and with
fine;

\(iv\) commits mischief by fire or any explosive substance intending to
cause or knowing it to be likely that he will thereby cause destruction
of any building which is ordinarily used as a place of worship or as a
place for human dwelling or as a place for custody of the property of a
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for life and with fine;

\(v\) commits any offence under the Indian Penal Code (Section 45 of
1860) punishable with imprisonment for a term of ten years or more
      against a person or property on the ground that such person is a member
      of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to
      such member, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and with
      fine;

\(vi\) knowingly or having reason to believe that an offence has been
committed under this Chapter, causes any evidence of the commission of
that offence to disappear with the intention of screening the offender
from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any information
respecting the offence which he knows or believes to be false, shall be
punishable with the punishment provided for that offence; or

\(vii\) being a public servant, commits any offence under this section,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than one year but which may extend to the punishment provided for that
offence.

\ 

These atrocities recognised by Parliament are against persons who are
born into the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, This is the first
time that atrocity has been used and defined as a legal category.

This law was intended to afford speedy justice, the speed being meant to
act as a deterrent. It has proved easy, however, to evade and thus
defeat the law without any necessity for open defiance. The assault on
_Dalits_ is legitimised by the acquittal of assailants. That is,
interpretive exercises by the courts have helped defeat this special
legislation. Offences under the act were made triable by a special court
whose presiding officer was to be a sessions judge. Special courts were
used for the purpose of a speedy trial, an aspect of Article 21 of the
Constitution. This cause was interpreted by the apex court to mean that,
like all other criminal offences, those against _Dalits_ should pass
through committal proceedings before a magistrate. The 1989 enactment
now remains only in the statute book, and it will slowly fall into
disuse. All this has been achieved without the help of loaded juries as
in the U.S. Meanwhile, our laws and constitutional provisions creating
special presidential commissions are show-cased to international bodies
through obliging attorney generals to demonstrate that the situation of
the _Dalit_ cannot be equated with race.

In this country, where everybody is born into a caste, getting rid of
caste disability has not been possible. Even if the upper caste person
converts to another religion, he would not give up the unequal status he
enjoys over a lower caste. We are dealing with hereditary
untouchability, as Ambedkar called it. Although the _Dalits_ do not bear
the characteristics of a separate race, Articles 341 and 366, which
define Scheduled Castes, use the words caste and race in juxtaposition,
making either or both of them eligible for inclusion in the list of
Scheduled Castes. _Dalit_ identity is assured by caste practices. Their
habitats are quarantined to ensure that proximity does not pollute the
upper castes. This is just a way to inform them of their subservient
status. This hegemonic culture is there for everybody to see. Legal and
sociological explanations of caste and race have no relevance to this
debate. The emphasis should be on discrimination and related
intolerances.

In fact, Ambedkar had demanded that the castes included in the Scheduled
Castes order of 1936 be declared a minority. He pointed out that this
group had all the characteristics of a minority. He was anxious to
secure minority status, as this would have brought the _Dalits_ out of the
Hindu fold and made them a distinct, identifiable group.

James Baldwin, the well-known African-American writer, describes the
condition of the Blacks in terms that could be used for the untouchables
in India:

> You were born where you were born and faced a future that you faced
> because you were black and for no other reason. The limits of your
> ambition were, thus, expected to be set forever. You were born into a
> society which spelt out with brutal clarity, in as many ways as
> possible, that you were a worthless human being. You were not expected
> to aspire to excellence; you were expected to make peace with
> mediocrity.[^186]

This is exactly what the caste system tells the untouchable. The slaves
were not transplanted to the Unites States to give them democracy. In
India, despite the grandiloquent declarations in the Constitution, birth
and descent are the main criteria. The identification of this targeted
collective of 160 million is not difficult; nor is it the issue. Racial
discrimination targets the blacks for trying to rise above the
subservient status allotted to them. They and the _Dalits_ are needed for
hard labour in the fields and for menial chores. They should be, to
better function in their allotted status, quarantined and rendered
invisible. Every society has such collectives that are targeted for
discrimination and violence. The perpetuation of such a collective can
only be by descent. The principle of power is at issue and not some
sociological definition or description of caste which does not tally
with the meaning of race. 160 million _Dalits_ are demanding that
untouchability and other forms of discrimination based on descent, as
practiced in India, be equated with or included in racial discrimination
and other related intolerances. The Indian government's arguments based
on sovereignty to bar outside scrutiny of obnoxious and obscurantist
practices violating human rights and dignity are irrational.
Identification has never been an obstacle to the use of discriminatory
practices and violence on _Dalits_. You can always ask them to wear
badges, as Hitler's Germany did to the Jews and as the Taliban did to
the Hindus living in Afghanistan.

After the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, it is necessary to
explore the violation of human rights in its various specific forms, as
occurring in various societies, which the member states are unable or
unwilling to eradicate on account of the power equations within their
nations. They are not willing to have them highlighted as wrongs by the
international community. The caste system in India, its hereditary
untouchability and the irrational and violent conduct these practices
engender should be recognised as crimes against humanity under the Rome
statute of the International Criminal Court.


[^186]:
James Baldwin, 'Letter to my nephew on the one hundredth anniversary
of the emancipation', of. John Henrik Clarke, 'The Alienation of
James Baldwin', in Clarke ed., Harlem, U.S.A., Berlin: Seven Seas
Publishers, 1976, p. 286.
