# Competent but Uncommitted Judges

Judicial appointments are in the news once again. The squabbles for
judgeship closely resemble the infighting within a political party for
ministerial positions. This state of affairs appears to be the logical
consequence of the way the high courts make judicial appointments. An
institution which day in and day out delivers judgments striking down
the executive's arbitrary actions is yet to formulate a sane policy
either with regard to appointments to the subordinate judiciary or in
the matter of recommending persons for elevation. In the initial stages,
efforts were made to make sure competent advocates got to serve as
judges, and these efforts were largely successful. Ignoring the
guidelines provided by the Constitution, appointments to the judiciary
have always been regarded as the exclusive concern of the Chief Minister
and the Chief Justice at the state level. Professional bodies, whether
it be the bar association or the state bar council, were mute
spectators. They did not think it was it their duty to interfere
critically and effectively in staffing the courts.

## A Domestic Problem {#23_competent-but-uncomm.xhtml#heading-1}

Professional leaders did not lift their gaze beyond the business values
of the day. Way back in 1922, William O'Douglas discovered that legal
practice required 'predatory qualities'.[^187] The aggressive
competition within the profession never permitted practitioners to pay
attention to the larger values propounded by the Constitution, which, to
the practitioners, is merely a money-spinning document. This attitude
has led to total indifference to the quality of justice. Neither
professional bodies nor the high courts have seemed alive to the fact
that the courts are public institutions which are socially accountable.
That the judiciary is the fulcrum of a democratic set-up was totally
lost sight of.

The members of the bar have always felt that criticising the functioning
of the judiciary and the appointment of judges is an internal matter
which should not be discussed publicly. Implied in this is the belief
that the justice system is created to provide livelihood for the
professional community. Thus, the profession has never functioned in a
socially relevant and responsible manner. Starting in 1967, governments
have tried to resurrect their plummeting socialist pretensions by means
of measures that became hotly contended in the courts. The debates and
decisions in and by the court were put out as confrontations between
Parliament and the judiciary. The ascendancy of populist politics made a
scapegoat of the courts. The reaction was more committed judges.

But a 'committed' judiciary has dangerous propensities. While it might
produce a few committed judges, it has immense possibilities of
producing a crop of careerists. There have always been judges holding
different political views; some even have strong political loyalties.
But this did not lead to the situation We are witnessing now, when the
accent is not even on competence. If in the process the litigant public
is blessed with competent judge it is by the sheerest of accidents.
Hereafter, the judiciary will be a mere formality, the continuous
functioning of which will earn our system of government the title of
democracy. The present system of appointments to the judiciary, without
any emphasis on efficiency and competence, will only encourage
sycophants and manipulators, whose only merit would be access to the
ruling power structure. Securing the concurrence of a chief justice will
not be a great problem, for he too has been nurtured and pruned in this
weird and self-destructive political culture. For the majority of young
men and women who have joined the profession, such a trend has
disastrous consequences. It leaves them without any idealism or a higher
sense of purpose. Professional performance under such conditions will
resemble a comic opera.

It should be remembered that the mere presence of a nominally
functioning institution does not by itself enhance its democratic
content. Staffing the courts with competent persons committed at least
to constitutional values and with a broad vision of what that commitment
implies is an urgent necessity. After having opened the floodgates of
accessibility by way of public interest litigation, and with increasing
judicial activism, the present system of appointments may reduce social
and economic justice to a farce.

## Central Role {#23_competent-but-uncomm.xhtml#heading-2}

A functioning institution is rooted in the life of the community and has
to be tested constantly by the needs of that community. The results of
its working must be open to enquiry. The staffing pattern of our
judicial system is incapable of meeting the challenges that come
frequently before the courts. It is the men inside who make or unmake
the institution. This has been the anguish expressed by jurists who
regard the courts as central to an effective democratic polity. In his
'Confronting Injustice', E. Cahn says:

> By insisting on the personal element in all processes of decision,
> fact-scepticism underscores our state of need. It admonishes that the
> best and wisest propositions of social ethics, politics and law will
> not preserve us if the men who apply them to concrete transactions are
> themselves philistine and mediocre, even affably mediocre. Nothing
> earthly can preserve us without sharply improved human qualities of
> leadership and citizenship.

Our system of justice is moth-eaten. It is being destroyed both from
within and by the government. Public criticism in the present situation
is not only in the public interest but also a social obligation. It
would not amount to interference with the administration of justice to
point out that our judiciary's method of functioning is totally out of
tune with the philosophy and imperative premise of the Constitution.

Karl Llewelyn's prescription for an efficient judiciary is instructive
and has contemporary relevance. The absolute bare bones for viable
appellate judicial work is first four-fold and then three-fold:

1. Uprightness;
2. A modicum of judgment (neither wild men nor fools must dominate the
    bench);
3. A modicum of reckonability of the result; and
4. That reckonability must in some material degree transcend the
    persons of the personnel.

That is the four-fold aspect, one of objective substance. The three-fold
aspect is one of subjective attitudes. Not only

1. must these things be there and at work, to the knowledge and in the
    feelings of the judges, but
2. the general public and perhaps especially, all but unreasonable
    litigants must feel their presence, and
3. the bar must know them to be there.[^188]

The present crisis has afflicted in the first instance the bar, but it
has at least for a decade, perhaps for more than two, been seeping
through the bar into the much wider public, which lacks the means for
constructive or remedial thinking and so is helpless, even a little
pitiable.

## Crisis Within {#23_competent-but-uncomm.xhtml#heading-3}

The crisis to which Llewelyn refers is present today, as also the
helplessness. The fact that _lok adalats_ are so vociferously advocated is
itself an indication of the crisis within the legal system. We no longer
hear about the dispensation of justice. We hear instead of the huge
pendency. The workman who has lost his job, the public servant who is
dismissed or who was denied his promotion, the poor and the landless who
reach the courts through public interest lawyering, the men who are
detained preventively or have been held in illegal custody are all
people in need of quick disposal. Traditional litigants do not go to the
courts to have their cases settled.

In fact, in almost all litigations, one side instructs its counsel to
prolong the matter. The rampant deal-making at the bar caters to the
needs of clients but subverts the purpose of the courts. While 'disposal
jurisprudence' may not even touch the fringe of the problem, it has
succeeded in introducing a productivity ethic into the administration of
justice. We find courts giving priority to 'batch cases' --- those that
raise the same issues --- mainly with a view to attain the disposal
target. Theoretically, the bar assumes both transient and transcendent
responsibilities--to serve clients and to serve society. This is an
irresoluble contradiction, so the transcendent responsibilities are
confined to seminars and lawyers' conferences. The transient
responsibilities, servicing one's client's concerns, go on undeterred.
The present method of staffing the courts is not suited to meet the
challenge of the transcendent responsibilities.


[^187]:
William O'Douglas, From Marshall to Mukherjea: Studies in American
and Indian Constitutional Law, Calcutta: Eastern Law House Ltd., 1956.

[^188]:
Karl Llewellyn, 'The Common Law Tradition' (1960) in Lord Lloyd of
Hampstead, Introduction to Jurisprudence, Fourth Edition, London:
Stevens & Sons, 1979, p. 522.
