# What is Wrong with Judicial Activism?

> 'It has long ... been my opinion, and I have never shrunk from its
> expression ... that the germ of dissolution of our federal government is
> in the Constitution of the federal judiciary; an irresponsible body
> (for impeachment is scarcely a scarecrow), working like gravity by
> night and by day, gaining a little today and a little tomorrow, and
> advancing its noiseless step like a thief, over the field of
> jurisdiction, until all shall be usurped from the States, and the
> government of all shall be consolidated into one.'
>
> \
>
> (Jefferson, in a letter to a friend dated 18 August 1821)
>
> \
>
> The Republicans, through corruption, have lost the confidence of the
> country, the Democrats have not regained it. Meanwhile, a new breed of
> judges went to the Bench.
>
> \
>
> (Wallace Mendelson)

The Preamble to the Constitution assigns to all the institutions created
by it an obligation to play a transformatory role. This and the
Directive Principles of State Policy set down in Part IV of the
Constitution elaborate the quality, character and direction of the tasks
assigned to the institutions. The Constitution is qualitatively
different from the Government of India Act, 1935, which was passed by
the Imperial Legislature. No doubt we have incorporated into our
Constitution many of the latter's provisions, but this does not detract
from the fact that the Constitution was hammered out by a constituent
assembly of representatives. Considering the circumstances leading to
Independence and the termination of foreign rule, the leaders who
spearheaded the struggle managed to to structure as representative a
body as possible. They opted for Western liberal values, which they then
used effectively against the British and Westminster models of
governance. In our country, Parliament is not paramount; the limitations
imposed by the Constitution are. These limitations assign a supervisory
role to the judiciary. To play this role the judiciary had to be assured
of independence and freedom from executive interference. In opting for
secularism and an independent judiciary while rejecting the presidential
system, the mandate was clear: democracy is intrinsically and
fundamentally valuable; apart from its instrumental value, history
informs us that if a humane society is our goal, democracy has to be a
way of life and not merely a system of governance. When Nehru proclaimed
our 'tryst with destiny' on August 15, 1947, he was referring to the
constitutional promise which was then on the anvil.

The progress towards this constitutional promise required that the three
branches of the government act in unison rather than as adversaries to
ensure inter-institutional equality and discipline. The claim for
institutional equality and whether the courts could discipline the
executive became a matter of fierce debate in the late 1960s and early
1970s, and it is again being revived with less justification. The debate
assumed an adversarial character, where the executive with a
parliamentary majority overtly tried to subordinate the judiciary with
some success. The entire debate proceeded on the assumption that the
parliament in our country, which has a written constitution, is a direct
descendant of the British parliament, with sovereign powers even to
legislate validly that all babies with blue eyes be thrown into the
nearest river. And therefore it was expected that the courts should play
a subordinate role. In this way, the executive has been continuing the
colonial tradition of arbitrariness, protected by statutory immunities
and a total absence of transparency. But the judiciary too has continued
colonial traditions, as can be illustrated by what happened to A.K.
Gopalan on 15 August 1950. When he was not released as expected, he
organised an Independence Day meeting within the jail premises, but the
very next day he was produced before a magistrate on charges of
sedition. All the judges who ruled on Gopalan's case, except Das, were
members of the Federal Court. Das was the only judge on this panel to
interpret personal liberty broadly. He pointed out that Article 19
includes several important attributes of personal liberty as independent
rights, and that Article 21 had to be understood as including within its
meaning 'all the varieties of rights which go to make up the personal
liberties of man.' He pointed out that the merit of our Constitution was
that it does not attempt to enumerate exhaustively all the personal
rights. Rather, it uses the compendious expression 'personal liberty' in
Article 21 and thereby protects all of them. Despite this broad
formulation, he concurred with the majority who shackled liberty with
their interpretive skill. All that was needed to justify incarceration
was the existence of an enacted law which prescribed the procedure for
detention. Defining Article 22 as a self-contained code ensured the
incarceration of liberty during normal times as a valid exercise of
power; in times of crisis there was not even the need for extraordinary
provisions.[^189] While the court denied liberty to Gopalan, it
recognised in Kameshwar Singh[^190] the right to property of a
_zamindar_ under a constitutional scheme, thus honouring the disposition
of predatory acquisitions that had been made legitimate by the colonial
system. This was the inauguration of the courts in independent India.
They continued the colonial system of restricting personal liberty by
defining it narrowly, and by honouring colonial legacies in favour of
Persons who had no role to play in the freedom struggle.

The doctrines propounded by the majority in Gopalan had the effect of
diminishing the expansiveness of freedom of property, which until
Kesavananda[^191] was a fundamental right. Justice Subba Rao in
*Kochunni* said:

> Had the question been res integra, some of us would have been inclined
> to agree with the dissenting view expressed by Justice Fazl Ali, but
> we are bound by the majority.[^192]

This was the beginning of the kind of judicial activism which ultimately
led to a confrontation with the executive. There is qualitative
difference between dissent in favour of property and one in favour of
liberty. The latter has a romantic aura about it and will get wide
social approval. In Kharak Singh,[^193] a case dealing with personal
liberty, Justice Subba Rao disagreed with the view that Articles 21 and
22 were self-contained codes, and that one whose liberty had been
restricted could not plead violation of the rights guaranteed under
Article 19. In Prabhakar Pandurang,[^194] a person's right to publish
his book written in prison was declared a part of the right to personal
liberty. Thus, the ground was prepared for a major onslaught on Gopalan.

When Subba Rao assumed the leadership of the court, the economic and
political climate of the country was depressing. Apart from the China
war in 1962, the planning process had failed, with all the attendant
consequences of high governmental investment and expenditure and no
corresponding return in real terms. Nehru's death precipitated a crisis.
In the elections of 1967, the Congress lost power in five states. There
was all-round degeneration in the political system and governance. The
judges, aware of what was going on in the country, felt that they should
call a halt to what they perceived as dangerous trends. The courts
reacted then as now, but the issues were different and the judges too
were of a higher stature and better equipped. When in Golak Nath[^195]
the issue was raised regarding the validity of the 17th Constitutional
Amendment, the court, by a slender majority, held that Parliament could
not abridge or take away fundamental rights. Without taking on vested
interests or reacting in a politically correct manner, Indira Gandhi
painted the court as the principal adversary of her radical politics.
The Golak Nath judgement negated the sweep of Article 368 to amend the
provisions contained in Part III of the Constitution. This was the first
major step taken by the Supreme Court to contain the erosion of the
constitutional scheme. The court was apprehensive that the erosion of
the right to property may be practised against other fundamental rights.
'Small inroads lead to larger ones,' said Justice Hidayatullah. This was
in February 1967.

Indira Gandhi launched a campaign against the judicial system, calling
it a major obstacle to progress towards socialism. There were quite a
few intellectuals --- academics, lawyers and judges --- who emphatically
criticised the Supreme Court's decision in Golak Nath and generally
regarded the court as the principal class enemy. They discovered the
Directive Principles of State Policy contained in Part IV of the
Constitution and the fundamental character of the obligations set out in
this chapter. They talked about 'door delivery of justice' and about the
need for 'barefoot lawyers'. The court, having decided on the political
character the Indian state should possess, went on to subject its
economic policies to judicial review in the bank nationalisation
case.[^196] Commencing with Gopalan, a long line of cases held that
each article in Part III guaranteed a distinct fundamental right and
therefore formed a self-contained code. Any infringement which fell
directly within the ambit of one guaranteed right could not be tested
for validity with reference to other rights. The court, overruling
Gopalan, declared that even if the law satisfied the requirements of
Article 31(2), it had to satisfy those of Article 19(1)(f) too. The
court's attitude to the amending power of the Constitution and to bank
nationalisation became campaign issues during the general elections of 1971. Victory in those elections, success in the Indo-Pakistan war which
brought Bangladesh into existence, and victory in state elections made
the executive strong, with the result that all these judgements were set
aside by the 24th, 25th and 26th Amendments to the Constitution.

The Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act, which came into force on
June 9, 1972, lodged the Kerala Land Reforms Amendment Act in the Ninth
Schedule of the Constitution. Both acts were challenged in Kesavananda
Bharati, The judgement was delivered on April 24, 1973. The debate,
major one, encompassed the type of polity we were committed to, the
power of Parliament to abrogate fundamental rights wholly at will, the
relationship between Directive Principles and Fundamental Rights, the
basic structure of the Constitution, particularly with reference to the
extent to which amendments can be introduced, whether our federal
democratic republican structure can be changed, and other similar
issues, with a view to containing the aggrandisement of power by the
executive. Under Article 31C, around ten rights enumerated in Part III
can be abrogated merely by declaring that the proposed law is in
furtherance of the Directives contained in Articles 39(b) or (c). While
seven out of these ten have nothing to with property, these changes were
brought about with the object of abolishing property. The principle of
basic structure emerged from this judicial debate. Although many were
sceptical about the court's role, the events which followed immediately
thereafter justified to a large extent its strident activism during that
period.

The court is not equipped to alter the course of history. Nor is it
meant to. In periods of political turbulence, the responses of the
judiciary and the executive (invariably backed by the legislature) may
be at variance, even to the extent of being diametrically opposite.
Political leadership, to win credibility, should seem to have full
authority, untrammelled if possible. Legality is a constraint on the
exercise of power, and judicial review is a road-block. When the court
is faced with the abrogation of the constitutional system with a view to
establishing an authoritarian regime, the judges of the court are left
with very few options. They are: (a) save the institutional values and
thus make the executive pause, as happened in the case of Nixon; (b)
face impeachment or be coerced to resign or resign voluntarily and
transfer the responsibility to others; (c) simply accept reality and
survive. In our case, supercession has compelled senior judges to
resign, while the rest have accepted this without even a protest at the
shabby treatment.

The concept of basic structure is an attempt to save our constitutional
value system. I would not brand all the judges who sat in the court
during that period arch-reactionaries. There must have been among them
individuals who were committed to preserving liberal values.
Supercession was an act of reprisal against the judiciary. The setting
aside of Mrs. Gandhi's election, the passing of the Election Laws
Amendment Act, 1975, and the Constitution (Thirty-ninth Amendment) Act,
1975, were brought again before the court, this time after the
proclamation of a state of emergency. The amendments introduced to the
election law and the Representation of the People Act were lodged in the
Ninth Schedule. Article 329A was designed to allow Mrs. Gandhi's
election appeal by legislative exercise and the abuse of constituent
power. Justice Matthew, who like the Biblical Jacob grappled all night
with the theory of implied limitations on amending power, had to wait
till Indira Gandhi's election appeal to realise the value of the
doctrine. And yet, these engagements with authoritarian powers did not
really strengthen the judiciary. When personal liberty was forfeited
without any procedure or valid reason, the majority abjectly surrendered
to the executive by validating an obnoxious piece of legislation which
barred judicial review in all such cases.

The policies of the government of the day are forever being equated with
national interests, an equation that ignores or overrides every
constitutional principle assuring limited government. Judicial review is
the means of enforcing limitations on governments. The presence of
strong political process is a great disciplining force for governments.
The court, in the meanwhile, is expected to promote faith in the rule of
law broadly defined, and to act in furtherance of the objectives set out
in the Constitution.

It was during the Emergency that the courts and the people realised that
representative institutions can become engines of tyranny. The last two
decades of the twentieth century have shown us that criminals operate
our political institutions. The way they have plundered renders all the
'marauding hordes of Hindustan' insignificant in comparison. In the next
phase, judicial activists had to take on crime, as all other
institutions had failed to play their assigned role. This time no
politics was involved. There was no ideological confrontation. The
subject matter was un-investigated crimes committed by elected
representatives occupying the positions of cabinet minister or chief
minister. These are white-collar crimes, but the size and magnitude of
appropriation makes the offence qualitatively different from the
wrongful gain or wrongful loss of Macaulay's code.[^197] The persons
responsible for these crimes do not suffer any civil or political
disabilities. The legal system has yet again proved inadequate to deal
with these large-scale plunders. The media generally subsumes them under
the expression 'scam'. There have also been allegations of Members of
Parliament being bribed to defeat no-confidence motions. Corrupting or
attempting to corrupt the parliamentary process is no offence.
Parliament passes stringent laws to curb terrorist activity, but when
political offences surface there is no such legislative response, not
even a private member's bill. While such bills may come to nothing, they
do have the merit of registering a member's protest.

Over the last fifteen years or so, public interest litigations have
amassed information on abuse of political power and aggrandisement while
in office. This information has been placed before the courts, the only
functioning institution under our Constitution. Till that point, a
public interest litigation (PIL) was a form of representative action for
social justice for the poor, the marginalised and the deprived classes.
They also spanned human rights violations and environmental issues. The
government did not protest. It was only when PILs started confronting
politicians and their conduct while holding office that we hear protests
against them. The court cannot indulge in selective legality and
therefore must initiate proceedings. Any legal system can have respect
and inspire adherence only if it appears even-handed in its application.
This does not, however, mean that the courts can browbeat the executive
with the threat of imposing President's Rule, or arrest people under one
or the other preventive detention law!

An activist attitude within a national institution is possible when its
leading members are willing to play an instrumental role in realising
the objectives contained in the Constitution; when there is a
willingness to assume that the Indian Constitution heralds a new
beginning and a decisive break from the British colonial system in all
respects, including the legal and administrative framework; when a
persistent effort is made to fashion new conceptual tools or to redefine
concepts to work out their constitutional purpose. But then, as
Dahrendorf, reiterating Eschenburg's advice to politicians, argues:

> All this would end up with the search for one virtue which has much to
> do with institutions, the virtue of authority ... But they have to be
> filled by personal authority, which is a delicate balance of qualities
> of leadership, institutional sense and contact with those who are
> affected by decisions. 'Only where these contacts exist but leadership
> remains in the lead, where it knows what needs to be done and works
> convincingly for its solutions can one speak of authority in the
> democratic sense.'[^198]

It is in its activist role that the judiciary has been deficient.
Rather, it has proceeded on the path of aggrandisement of power. It has
expanded and sharpened its contempt jurisdiction, and has by an
interpretive device wrested the appointment of judges from the executive
without introducing an objective method of selection. In fact, its use
of PILs to appropriate to itself the power of appointing judges can
never be called legitimate judicial activism. The court has never
attempted to democratise its procedures, proceedings and discourse, and
has not yet made a clean break from its colonial legacy. As presently
constituted, the courts are an amalgam of persons, some of undoubted
merit and competence, who adjudicate on the basis of adhoc consensus and
not on a shared vision.


[^189]:
For an analysis of Gopalan, see Chapter _Personal Liberty after Independence_.

[^190]:
State of Bihar v. Kameswar Singh, AIR 1952 SC 252; Raghubir Singh v.
Court of Wards, Ajmer, AIR 1953 SC 373.

[^191]:
Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, AIR 1973 SC 1461.

[^192]:
Kochunni v. State of Madras, AIR 1960 SC 1080.

[^193]:
Kharak Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 1969 SC 1295.

[^194]:
State of Maharashtra v. Prabhakar Pandurang Sangagiri, AIR 1966 SC 424.

[^195]:
Golak Nath v. State of Punjab, AIR 1967 SC 1643.

[^196]:
RC Cooper v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597.

[^197]:
Macaulay did not define plunder as an offence, because that is a
coloniset's prerogative.

[^198]:
Ralph Dahrendorf, 'Society and Liberty', in Law and Order (The
Hamlyn Lectures), London: Stevens & Sons, 1985, p. 151.
