# Collective Action: The Andhra Pradesh Lawyers' Strike

When the lawyers of the Andhra Pradesh High Court Bar Association went
on an indefinite strike recently, the question this raises is not
'should the lawyers go on strike at all?', but 'why is it they are
driven to collective action so often, and for one reason or the other?'

The lawyers' profession, as it functions, is not structured to respond
collectively. Aggressive, competitive ethics are the governing
principles of the profession. The political views of individual members
never enter the arena of their professional practice. The volition and
values that guide lawyers in their Career are often disguised under the
cloak of technical proficiency and skill. Thus, the successful lawyer
sells his craft to the highest bidder and yet can proclaim that his
practice is 'an avenue for service and not a means for private gain.'
Laissez faire still operates in the profession. Schizophrenia is not a
lawyer's disorder; it is a necessary trait to eliminate from
consideration the social and political implications of his work. This
schizophrenia assures nobility outside and value-free performance inside
the court halls, along with promises of prosperity.

That a profession which has been functioning independent of society and
in total fidelity to nineteenth century laissez faire is repeatedly
driven to collective action informs us that there is something wrong
with the nation. Unfortunately, when lawyers go on strike the debate
that follows obfuscates the real issue --- the reason for the strike. The
excessive use of wishful descriptions about the profession --- its
nobility, duty to the clients, constitutional obligations and such other
references to its platonic essence as reasons against strikes and
collective action --- sound hollow, if not farcical. It should be noted
that repeated collective action not only leads to the edge of anarchy
but also focuses our attention on the crisis in legitimacy of our
constitutional arrangements.

Take the posting of the Chief Justice of Delhi as the Chief Justice of
the Andhra Pradesh High Court. It is this which led to the strike
mentioned earlier. The collective anger of the lawyers was not generated
out of an abstract love for the acting Chief Justice or hatred against
the incumbent from Delhi. Lawyers have an assigned role as part of the
judiciary under the Constitution. They are part of an institution, which
has claims to equality along with the legislature and the executive. It
is also an institution which, at any rate theoretically, ensures a
limited government, a government by laws and not of men as the old adage
goes. When lawyers go on strike it generally is with reference to the
working of the judiciary. A strike by lawyers can never be for the
purpose of promoting their earnings. The Andhra agitation was not for a
chief justice; it was against the principle of these transfers. When
they were originally introduced, however, they were welcomed as a sign
of progress.

Transfers and supercessions claim legitimacy from the 14th Law
Commission report of 1959. The government noticed this report only in
1973 and used it to throw overboard the principle of seniority after the
judgment in Kesavananda Bharati.[^212] The Law Commission felt that
the chief justice of India should not only be a man of ability and
experience, but also a competent administrator capable of handing the
complex matters that may arise from time to time, a shrewd judge of men
and personalities, a person of sturdy independence who would if the need
arose be the watchdog for the independence of the judiciary. An erudite
and able judge need not necessarily possess the qualifications required
for a chief justice.

## Job Requirements {#28_collective-action-th.xhtml#heading-1}

If these job requirements could not be met from within the judiciary, it
would be better to bring in an outsider. According to the same
Commission, similar requirements are necessary for the chief justices of
the high courts. After the promulgation of a state of emergency in 1975,
one more policy decision was engrafted to those recommended by the Law
Commission. The government felt that one third of the judges should be
from the outside. This principle received wide support from the bar, not
because such a course would serve the interests of the public, but
because it was felt it might put an end to the system of 'concubinage'
which promoted the practice of a select few at the expense of equally
able contenders. Such a course, the lawyers felt, would create
conditions of equality in the predatory exercise of their calling.

In our country's politics, everything is ostensible; nothing is real.
While implementing the Law Commission's recommendations, government
negated the reason behind the policy. The Andhra Pradesh High Court has
had several chief justices from outside, and many of its judges have
been sent out as chief justices to other states. If those who were
transferred were not considered fit to head their own court, how could
they provide leadership to a court in another state, and in entirely new
surroundings?

As for the chief justices from outside, one cannot assert that they left
an indelible impression on the functioning of the Andhra High Court. Nor
can one say that they left the institution stronger and sturdier. The
lawyers perceived this exercise as an attempt by the executive to
denigrate and thereby subordinate the legal institutions to partisan
political interest. It is more than two decades since the system was
introduced. The profession should review the policy and its
effectiveness.

## Humiliation {#28_collective-action-th.xhtml#heading-2}

The transfers subjected the judges to humiliation, and served no other
purpose. One transferee tendered his resignation, while the other was
sent overnight to Patna as chief justice of that high court. Yet another
acting chief justice, if not transferred, will have to serve as a puisne
judge in a court headed by an outsider. The judicial institution and the
legal profession should not learn to cope with this insane exercise of
power, but to discipline the exercise of power and restore sanity. We
have been witness to open subversion and flouting of all constitutional
norms and conventions. Parliamentary cretinism, a Marxist pejorative,
has literally come true.

The crisis in legitimacy is visible to all. Legitimacy goes beyond legal
rights and entitlements. It encompasses issues of moral or ethical
entitlements, issues of the ends for which power is used, and issues of
the means and procedures by which power is used. The 59th Constitutional
Amendment signaled repressive institutional changes. If the rule of law
could be dispensed with in relationship to Punjab, it can be dispensed
with just as easily in other areas of the country.

## Young Blood {#28_collective-action-th.xhtml#heading-3}

A subordinated judicial system will only lend legitimacy to
arbitrariness and brutality. It is this inchoate perception of things to
come that is driving lawyers to collective action such as strikes. It is
the overwhelming and overpowering presence of young lawyers, who are not
yet sold on the laissez faire philosophy, thar makes these collective
actions successful.

The Andhra Pradesh High Court is no exception. Successful senior members
of the bar may resent strike actions by lawyers. It does cause
inconvenience, and litigants are perhaps harassed. In fact, the striking
advocates may not even have public support or sympathy. But this is true
of all strikes. It is equally true that lawyers as a body keep away from
protests by others, and do not raise their voice of protest against
injustice outside their profession. This fragmantation and insularity
are not peculiar to advocates.

One often cites instances of illegal detentions and high prerogative
writs of _habeas corpus_ as arguments against lawyers' strikes. However,
illegal detention of the poor has been taking place with or without
strikes. _Habeas corpus_ does not occupy the prestigious position it did
in earlier times, as the content of our liberty has eroded to the point
where procedure --- the last defence of a citizen as a person --- has been
taken away by legal fiction, and where a confession made to a police
officer is enough to make a person swing as a terrorist.[^213]

## Last Bastion {#28_collective-action-th.xhtml#heading-4}

The profession had no time to debate these Draconian measures when
tabled. The proposal of constitutional amendment has been in the air for
some time. Yet there was no debate in professional bodies. When judicial
remedies, the continued existence of which alone will ensure us a
democratic polity, are suffering gradual eclipse and ultimate
extinction, any talk about the responsibility of lawyers under the
Constitution to counter collective action by lawyers sounds hollow.
Practising under these conditions may even be downright dishonest.

The question is not whether a particular individual should head the
Andhra court. It is the principle behind the practice of transfers that
has to be questioned. In fact, the Andhra lawyers did not go so far. All
they wanted was that the acting chief justice should not be humiliated.
Obviously, this limited demand was aimed at preventing a division among
the lawyers. Notwithstanding the limited demand, it is time to consider
whether the practice of transferring chief justices serves the purposes
of the institution and helps in the preservation of the value system in
the Constitution.

Lawyers, being part of the judiciary, which is one of the basic
institutions under the Constitution, do have a constitutional obligation
to intercede and prevent erosion of this institution. This institution
is an instrumentality of the people. We owe it to the people and to
posterity to preserve it as such. Thus, collective legal action is
perhaps a healthy sign, an attempt by a professional group to transform
itself into a socially useful entity.


[^212]:
Kesavananda Bharati v. State of Kerala, AIR 1973 SC 1461.

[^213]:
_See_ Chapter _The Weird Jurisprudence of a Dead Act_.
