# Governors and Politics

Governors were intended to provide national unity and that is why, after
a full debate, it was decided to have the present system, wherein the
President appoints the governor, whose tenure can be pleasurable but
with no express assurance that the exercise of pleasure will not be
whimsical. He reigns but does not govern. His constitutional
ventriloquist is the Council of Ministers. To employ Walter Bagehor's
metaphor, the governor is the buckle that binds the state to the centre,
a link from which the state can never secure its release
constitutionally. Indian governors have been denied the arbitrary powers
that they enjoyed under the British, but then we have had our own
variety of abuses of power orchestrated through governors. None of us
are democrats, either by tradition or training. The diffusion of power
and its exercise have been the subjects of human struggle. All of our
efforts have been to contain power and its abuse, and setting up a
constitution is one of the accepted methods for this. We wrote a
constitution for ourselves and made a turn towards what we call
democracy. But we forgot to restructure the institutions we inherited
from the British in constitutional terms.

In the appointments of governors and in the purposes for which they have
been used, we find examples of abuse and the steady undermining of our
Constitution. A governor's discretionary power to call a particular
party to rule a state, and the power to recommend dismissal of state
governments have been matters of debate throughout the fifty years of
the Constitution.

The first glaring abuse was the formation of the Madras government after
the first general elections under the Constitution. That was in 1952. In
that election the United Front, led by Tanguturu Prakasam, secured 166
seats and the Congress got 152 seats in the 375 member state assembly.
Sri Prakasa, then governor of Madras, rejected Prakasam's claim and
called upon Rajaji, who had not even been elected to either house, to
form a government, after first nominating him to the Legislative
Council. On this act of impropriety Rajaji became the chief minister of
the first Congress government after Independence. Prime Minister Nehru
and President Prasad did not like it, but Rajaji and Sri Prakasa felt
that establishing an 'ideological democracy' was insufficient
justification to risk leaving patches of 'rebel' areas and slipping into
disorder. Governor K.M. Munshi of Uttar Pradesh, one of the architects
of the Constitution, commended Sri Prakasa for handing the reins of
governance to Rajaji to prevent the area from sliding into communism.

The ends and means debate employed against communists and their methods
were not applicable to their adversaries. It was around this period and
without reference to these events that Justice Patanjali Sastri of the
Supreme Court was at pains to point out that the Constitution was
intended to be operated by political parties of varied persuasions and
should be handled with care. The absence of congruence between the rule
and the way it was administered became more and more blatant.

In 1957, the Communist Party secured 60 out of the 126 seats in the
Kerala Legislature and, with the help of independents, formed a
government there. The pre-emptive step taken against them at Madras was
absent in Kerala. The Kerala Education Bill, the land ceiling laws and
other such measures withstood constitutional and legal tests. But the
Kerala government was brought down by the use of 'extra-parliamentary
tactics' and violence. Governance without state violence became
impossible. Governor Burugula Ramakrishna Rao declared that the
government had lost the support of the majority of the people, and that
to continue to govern on the basis of legislative majority was not
proper. So he recommended the imposition of President's rule.

In West Bengal in 1967, Governor Padmaja Naidu called upon Bangla
Congress leader, Ajoy Ghosh, as he had the support of the United Front.
Immediately thereafter, there was a tussle between Ajoy Ghosh and P.C.
Ghosh for power. This rivalry was manipulated by the centre by using the
next governor, Dharma Vira, as the hatchet man. But working out the
replacement of Ajoy Ghosh and inducting P.C. Ghosh became quite a
problem, and the new governor ended up by recommending President's rule
for West Bengal. Thereafter, even parties of the same persuasion were
not permitted to rule a state if they posed a threat to the power
structure at the centre.

According to the Sarkaria Commission, between 1947 and 1967, thirty-two
governors lasted their full five-year term, but of the eighty-eight
tenures in the period from 1967 to 1986, only 18 lasted for five years.
Premature exits were much faster in the later period and fewer lasted
the full term. Governors have also been used to do the centre's dirty
work. At first, no communist government was allowed to function. Even
the possibility of communists coming to power was unabashedly prevented.
But it did not stop there. The habit of toppling state governments for
no valid or acceptable reason has led to trivialisation of governance.
Governor Ramlal dismissing N.T. Ram Rao's government, the fight for
power between the latter and his son-in-law, the litigation and the
counting of heads in state assemblies by the governor and, last but not
least, Governor Fathima Beevi calling upon a convicted person, whose
nomination had been rejected by two returning officers, to form
government, are instances of callous trivialisation of the Constitution.

In order to stay in power, it is necessary to camouflage abuses and
subversion with a thin veneer of constitutionality and legality, as
proof against revolt. In the course of abuse, when things become
uncomfortable, a debate ensues. With every furore about the doings of a
governor, a debate ensues about his or her appointment, and the furore
is soon absorbed by the debate. Now we have started appointing
superannuated civil servants who during their careers managed their
political bosses well. The question that has never been answered is:
'Will the political system operating the Constitution refrain from
abuse?'
