# Political Justice through Concerted Protest

There cannot be a matter of greater public importance than the
assassination of the prime minister of a country. A one-man commission
of inquiry headed by Justice Thakker, a sitting judge of the Supreme
Court, was appointed to enquire into the assassination of Prime Minister
Indira Gandhi in 1984. The commission submitted its report in 1986 and
the government was supposed to place the report before the Lok Sabha
soon after. But the President promulgated an ordinance introducing
amendments to the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, evidently to avoid
doing so. The reason was the sovereignty and integrity of India.
Similarly, the 'security of the state', 'friendly relations with foreign
states' and 'the public interest' have been used to create new
legislation. These terms have been introduced time and again into
statutes to exclude the entire body of citizens from all or any of the
rights secured by them. These terms have been invoked to confer on
governmental exercise of power a legitimacy which is beyond scrutiny. In
effect, they preempt social and political accountability. Any action
under their cover becomes a legitimate exercise of power purely because
the motives that prompted these actions are not open to debate.

## Principal Section {#31_political-justice-th.xhtml#heading-1}

Section 3 is the principal section of the Commission of Inquiry Act. It
deals with the powers of the central and state governments in appointing
commissions of inquiry; the constitution of such a commission; how to
fill vacancies in it to ensure continuity; and the obligation of the
state or central government to table its report before the Legislative
Assembly or the Lok Sabha, as the case may be, within six months,
together with a memorandum on the steps taken by the government on the
report within six months.

The government found the 1952 Act deficient in many respects and
referred it to the Law Commission. After detailed examination, the
latter, in its 24th report, suggested several revisions and the
government introduced the corresponding amendments in the Commissions of
Inquiry (Amendment) Bill, 1969, which was later referred to a Joint
Committee of Parliament.

During the course of evidence given before the Joint Committee, it
emerged that the reports of such commissions on important issues of
national interest often did not see the light of day even though a
considerable amount of public funds had been spent on them. The Joint
Committee therefore considered it necessary that a specific provision
should be made in the act requiring the appropriate government to cause
the report of every commission of inquiry to be laid before Parliament
or State Legislature, together with a memorandum in regard to the action
thereon within a period of six months from the date of submission of the
report.

Pursuant to the evidence before it, the Joint Committee introduced
Subsection 4 and Section 3 into an amended act in 1971. This was in
deference to public demand and is in fact a recognition of the principle
of social accountability. Though the Commission of Inquiry Act has been
on the statute book from 1952 onwards, the principle of social
accountability, albeit of a very limited nature, was only recognised by
the amendment introduced in 1971. After 15 years the original position
was restored, with an added disability that prohibits discussion of the
report even in a privileged body like Parliament should the government
invoke the amendment.

In the act as it originally stood, there was no provision that required
the government to place the report before the Lok Sabha or the
Legislative Assembly. But debate, whether inside Parliament or outside,
was not explicitly prohibited. When Subsection 4 was introduced, debate
was confined to Parliament, not because the public was prohibited, but
because it was believed this job could only be entrusted to a
responsible and expert body.

By the amending ordinance, if the government waives application of
Section 3 on any ground, public debate is silenced. The public is all
too familiar with the powerful terms 'integrity and sovereignty of
India', 'security of state', 'friendly relations with foreign states'
and 'public interest'. Once the waiver is invoked, all debate about the
report gets linked to one or the other of the preventive detention laws,
or to one or the other of the offences in the Indian Penal Code listed
as offences against the state. Leaks can be treated as treasonable or
seditious, or as adequate ground for preventive detention.

Under Section 3, a commission of inquiry may be appointed either by the
government or on a resolution passed by the Lok Sabha or the Legislative
Assembly. Thus, the government may at its discretion and of its own
volition refer a specific matter of public importance to a commission of
inquiry, but where a resolution has been passed by a legislative body,
the government has no option but to refer the matter to a commission of
inquiry. In the latter case, however, the executive can invoke the
amendment and prevent the commission's report from being tabled before
the representative body for debate.

Thus, the power which our legislative bodies have reserved for
themselves was obliterated by an ordinance. The waiver of 1986 referred
to was obviously with reference to the obligation of the government
under Subsection 4 of Section 4, according to which a report must be
laid before the representative body.

The impropriety deserves careful scrutiny: the executive, which is under
an obligation to refer a matter to a commission of inquiry or report to
Parliament, can flout its obligations with impunity simply by waiving
the application of Section 3. The sweep of the amendment is not confined
only to the report. If the Lok Sabha considers that a matter merits
discussion, the executive can veto the resolution on the grounds
mentioned in the amendment. Thus, the integrity and sovereignty of
India, the security of the state, friendly relations with foreign states
and public interest have been made the exclusive concerns of the
executive. The use and frequent repetition of these terms ensures
minimum participation by citizens.

Under these conditions, the opposition parties are disabled from forcing
a political debate, as such an effort would be characterised as
_antinational_ and irresponsible. They are thus distanced from active
participation in the governance of the country. The presence of an
opposition in Parliament becomes formal; its ineffective presence even
confers a seal of legitimacy to the acts of the ruling party.

In a rigidly formal sense this amendment may be lawful. In fact, the
courts have upheld Draconian legislations of doubtful legitimacy as
competent. But is such an exercise of power legitimate with regard to
constitutional arrangements and the major premise underlying these
arrangements? Legitimacy does not concern itself so much with whether
governmental exercise of power is lawful. Rather, what is at issue is
the manner and purpose of the exercise of constitutional power and the
justification of such an exercise. The perspective for legitimacy should
be with reference to the constitutional scheme, the history which
brought it into existence, and the expectations of the people who
entrusted these powers to the government by the Constitution. If the
manifestations of executive power are examined, one finds a growing
centralisation of power, both at the state and union levels, impervious
to charges of abuse and to all forms of traditional political protest.

## Issues Involved {#31_political-justice-th.xhtml#heading-2}

What is the use of a Constitution which not only imposes limitations on
the governmental exercise of power but positively mandates that
governmental action should be guided primarily by obligations
'fundamental to the governance of the country', when it is not adhered
to by the institutions created by it? The issues raised by the
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952, are not confined only to the abuse of
the ordinance-making powers of the President and the Governors under the
Constitution; the right to information and political justice are also
involved.

The large-scale and generous use of ordinance-making power was noticed
by the Supreme Court when it said:

> One of the larger states in India has manifested its addiction to
> power by making an over-generous use of it --- so generous indeed thar
> ordinances which lapsed by efflux of time were renewed successively by
> a chain of kindred creatures, one after another. And the ordinances
> embrace everything under the Sun, from prince to pauper and crimes to
> contracts. The Union Government, too, passed about 200 ordinances
> between 1960 and 1980, out of which 19 were passed in 1980.[^238]

Free resort to ordinance-making power always raises questions of
legitimacy. When such legislative powers of the President came up in the
Constituent Assembly, the debate focused on the possibility of the
President assuming dictatorial powers. Our parliamentary democracy, it
was believed, would avoid a dictatorial regime coming into existence
through a constitutionally sanctioned presidential system. What was not
anticipated at that time was the movement towards a system of elective
dictatorship. The founding fathers of the Constitution did not perceive
what Thomas Paine foresaw when he said:

> It is not because a part of the government is elective, that makes it
> less a despotism, if the persons so elected possess afterwards, as a
> parliament, unlimited powers. Election, in this case, becomes
> separated from representation, and the candidates are candidates for
> despotism.[^239]

## Engines of Tyranny {#31_political-justice-th.xhtml#heading-3}

It is slowly being realised that

> ... representative institutions are not necessarily guardians of
> freedom but can themselves become engines of tyranny.[^240]

There is unfortunately a popular belief that electoral victory enables
the party in power to impose its will and bring about irreversible
changes on a helpless people who did not vote for them and maybe even
actively opposed them.

> We should surely need our heads examined if we were to go on with a
> system by which members selected as candidates by existing methods of
> nomination and elected as members by existing methods of voting, are
> entitled to vote general legislation without adequate control, legal
> or political, on the use of their powers.[^241]

These words of Lord Hailsham addressed to the Labor Party could well
apply to the Indian situation.

The first casualty in every illegitimate exercise of power is freedom of
speech and information, which comprises the right to know and to be
informed. And the question of free speech is invariably a question of
political justice. Both these have suffered total obliteration in
practice. The state's violations of these rights are legion. While the
courts have shown some concern for social justice, on issues of
political justice they have basically sided with the state. There is
hardly any concerted or informed protest. Once information is blocked,
all acts of authority are perceived as legitimate.

The illegitimate exercise of power surfaced in 1969. This overt
illegitimacy was justified on the grounds that it was necessary to sweep
away inertia, institutional blockages and interest groups dedicated to
the status quo. Populist politics acquired a new legitimacy by pressing
into service the Directive Principles, sweeping away even formal
democracy in the process by invoking the emergency provisions of the
Constitution in 1975. The illegitimate exercise of power has been so
continuous since then that we now no longer need promulgation of a state
of emergency to ensure obedience.

The people are fully conditioned to the exercise of arbitrary power.
Terms like security of the state, integrity and sovereignty of India,
etc., are reserved for the politically articulate. The use of these
terms is calculated to facilitate the use by the government of
unrestricted power and to put anyone it chooses under surveillance. The
objective of this power is to obstruct informed judgment, which alone
can help discipline the government and compel it to not only be fair and
just in its acts but also to enable it to attain the objectives
contained in the Preamble without distortion either in means or in
results. Also, illegitimate exercise of power goes unchecked on account
of the helplessness of opposition within Parliament, which has over the
years forgotten the art of taking up issues of democracy and organising
protest, making a conscious effort in the process to raise the quality
of public debate.

The amendments referred to earlier pose a threat to the right to life of
the accused in the broader sense of the term. Although the report by
itself may not have any relevance in a criminal trial, the disclosure of
the report and debating it would have compelled the government to act
justly. It is equally a matter of political justice when a few thousand
Sikhs are killed because the assassins were members of the Sikh
community. Viewed from any angle, disclosing the report would have been
in the public interest, which need not be shrouded in vague terms like
security of the state.

The question should be taken up as an issue of the legitimate exercise
of power. Having distanced itself from the people, the political
opposition has encouraged increasing reliance on the courts to resolve
political questions. Perhaps the only way to check illegitimate
exercises of power is by restructuring democratic protests to generate
wider public participation.


[^238]:
D.C. Wadhwa v. State of Bihar, AIR 1987 SC 579.

[^239]:
Thomas Paine, The Rights of Man (1791), Pelican, 1977, p. 215. _Also see_ Carol Harlow, 'Power from the People? Representation and
Constitutional Theory' in McAuslan and McEldowney, eds., Law,
Legitimacy and the Constitution, London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1985.

[^240]:
Lord Hailsham, The Dimbleby Lecture, 1977, later expanded in The
Dilemma of Democracy, London, 1978. See Patrick McAuslan and John F.
McEldowney, 'Legitimacy and the Constitution: The Dissonance between
Theory and Practice', in McAuslan and McEldowney, eds., Law,
Legitimacy and the Constitution, London: Sweet & Maxwell, 1985, pp.
13--14.

[^241]:
_Ibid_., p. 17.
