# Defining Right as Wrong: Reflections on Associational Freedoms and Free Speech

> The struggle of man against tyranny is the struggle of memory against
> forgetting.
>
> \
>
> Milan Kundera

## Trade Unions and the Right of Association {#32_defining-right-as-wr.xhtml#heading-1}

The right to association and to free speech, even today central to a
discourse on human rights and civil liberties in India, must be
understood in the historical context in which they emerged at the
international, national and subnational levels. This chapter will
examine the relevance of this history to an understanding of the trade
union movement in India and in understanding the character of the state
in the struggles for associational freedoms and freedom of speech.

The Industrial Revolution provides the point of departure for the
present exercise. The migration to industrial towns where factories were
located brought with it the freedom from feudal shackles and the related
freedom to bargain with employers. This and other revolutions and the
Bill of Rights gave individuals the right to liberty and contract, both
of which could not have survived the defining principles of
status-ridden societies.

The people, however, always had the choice of revolting against tyranny,
a sort of right they possessed long before the bourgeois revolutions
that granted the right to liberty. Revolts have always been collective
actions, the collective never only an aggregate of individuals or a
crowd developing a common intention on the spot as defined by Macaulay's
penal code. Rather, the group or collective always shared a fairly
definite understanding of the purpose for which it had gathered, and it
demanded conformity, consensual or otherwise, from its members. In other
words, the 'right' to associate and rebel is perhaps as old as human
society itself.

The transition from status to contract, viewed initially as an
'emancipation', soon led the serfs gathered in England's industrial
districts to the realisation that their newly won freedom was an
illusion. The French Revolution and the subsequent wars which lasted
twenty years created an internal crisis in England. Parliamentary
reforms intended to extend suffrage, obtained by associational struggles
for better representation in the Commons, were not only shelved but any
talk about reforms became an offence.

Meanwhile, the coming together of people at factory sites became
inevitable in the context of industrial production and the growth of
worker townships. The concentration of workers in large numbers had two
consequences. The government looked upon them as potential Jacobin
agglomerations that were politically threatening. While Burke fulminated
against the French Revolution, Paine campaigned for the rights of man.
He attacked the monarchical system and was intolerant even of a reduced
monarchy. He wanted to toss out all the dead wood of Britain and replace
it with a republican form of government whose power could come through
the people. He regularly addressed assemblies of workers. But Paine was
exiled and his writing banned because he had asserted his right to form
an association. In a single sweep, Paine's right to free speech, the
people's right to peaceful assembly, their right to form an association,
and Paine's right to move about freely were all denied. Trevelyan,
dealing with this period, illustrates it with the prosecutions that were
launched:

> Finally in 1794, the government was so far blinded by panic that it
> sought the lives of the Reformers. A charge of High Treason was
> instituted against Thomas Hardy, the shoe-maker, the founder of the
> Corresponding Society and the principal leader of the constitutional
> movement in politics among the working classes. Other innocuous and
> respectable persons, like Thelwall the lecturer and Horne Tooke the
> philologist, were tried on the same capital charge. But the good
> genius of England came to her rescue in her characteristic
> institution, the jury system. Pitt had outraged the English sense of
> fair play. Thanks to Erskine's persuasive eloquence, twelve Tory
> jurymen acquitted Hardy and his fellow prisoners on the capital
> charge, and reminded the government that the methods of Robespierre
> were not wanted over here.[^242]

The freedom to communicate, free speech, the freedom to assemble,
freedom of association and freedom of movement-all were transformed into
high treason. The second consequence was to restrain workers from coming
together to improve their working conditions and living standards. The
Combination Acts introduced by Pitt applied both to traders'
combinations and trade unions. But its application to curb workers'
right to form unions was primarily aimed at disabling them from becoming
a powerful political adversary. The strength secured by association is
so formidable that it leads to claims against other groups and
individuals. A well-organised workers' union has the power to paralyse
governments and political and economic institutions. This power has
always been used to secure for the working class a fair wage and decent
living conditions. However, the possibility that workers' associations
could be harnessed to support radical movements led to the prohibition
of all activities of workers in combination.

Thus, the trade union movement started its career with a conspiracy
charge, which is associational in character and content. An assembly or
association of persons gathered for political or quasi-political
purposes has always been viewed as unlawful or conspiratorial.
Associations always appear conspiratorial from the perspective of
authority and power. The right to assemble is always assumed to be
unlawful and preemptively prohibited by invoking the provisions of
public tranquillity in a suitable statute.

The overt criminality attributed to trade unions ended with the repeal
of the Combination Acts in 1824--25, but then strikers began to be
charged for intimidation. This was because some among a large number of
strikers hurled stones or indulged in physical violence of one sort or
another. This led to the easy assumption that trade unionism depended on
the use of force and violence.[^243]

The effort at attrition this time took new forms. Employees resorted to
civil action. Lawyers innovated on the charge of conspiracy to injure
and held the union and its office bearers liable for tort. Trade union
activity interfered with the basic economics of competition and
therefore had to be curbed by the defining and interpreting devices of
the courts. The taming of direct political action by legality is
exemplified by the history of the trade union movement and also by other
political dissent and protest movements. It is this process of taming
labour by the institutions of the bourgeois revolution which is
interesting. Under this head, acts done in concert become actionable
wrongs, while the same done by individuals may not furnish cause for a
legal proceeding.

A combination of traders or business undertakings formed to eliminate
competition was not considered to be a restraint on trade, despite
injury to rival traders, in Mogul Steamship Company. The appeals court
and the House of Lords upheld the right to form combinations to
eliminate trade rivals. Morals have no place in competition, which
implies destroying one's rival. They found nothing wrong in forming such
trade combinations so long as they were free from violence or such other
means. This judgement was a judicial elaboration of the Darwinian
principle of survival of the fittest![^244] The effective result, as
this case showed, was the elimination of competition and the emergence
of a monopoly. The Combination Acts posed no obstacles, but the
interpretation given to the Trade Union Acts of 1871--76 was obviously
with the intention of criminalising the activities of trade unions.

The employees of the Taff Vale Railway Company went on strike in 1900.
The management sued them for damages, treating the strike as a tort and
an activity not covered by the provisions of the Trade Union Act, which
workers thought gave their union and its officials immunity from legal
proceedings against union activities. This immunity was denied to the
railway company trade union, and it was held that, despite being an
unincorporated body, it could be sued for damages.[^245] One of the
judges held that a preventive injunction and even a mandamus could be
issued. Webb and Webb point out that this decision set at nought the
three prior decades of immunity enjoyed by the trade unions, and that it
led to unrest among the working class.[^246] It was described as
showing flagrant disregard of the intention of the government and
Parliament. The Trade Disputes Act, 1906, reversed both Taff Vale and
Quinn v. Leatherns[^247] by giving immunity to trade unions for any
act done in contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute.

The Osborne judgment struck at the effort of trade unions to establish
links with a political party by raising funds for a candidate's election
to Parliament. In practice, the workers could only establish links with
the Labour Party, which had a socialist programme. One Mr. Osborne,
obviously supported by the management, brought an action against the
Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants, restraining this union from
demanding that workers contribute to a political fund. There was a
condition in the bylaws that members of Parliament should obey the party
whip. The court seized on this clause and made it one of the reasons for
invalidating the power of unions to raise political funds:

> Unless a member becomes bound to the society and to the Labour Party
> by these conditions, and shapes his parliamentary action in conformity
> therewith, and with the decisions of the parliamentary party, he has
> broken his bargain. Take the testing instance: should his view as to
> right and wrong on a public issue, as to the true line of service to
> the realm, as to the real interests of the constituency which has
> elected him or of the society which pays him, differ from the decision
> of the parliamentary party and the maintenance by it of its policy, he
> has come under a contract to place his vote and action into subjection
> nor to his own convictions but their decisions.[^248]

This was neither congruent with the spirit of the constitution nor with
the principle of representative government in the United Kingdom. The
court had given the trade unions corporate status; having been formed
under a statute, their activities could never be permitted to stray from
the purposes for which they had been created. The court invoked the
doctrine of ultra vires. Trade union activity was limited to the
purposes expressly set out. This disabled the trade unions from carrying
out the various beneficient roles they were playing. According to Webb
and Webb:

> what lay behind the Osborne judgement was a determination to exclude
> the influence of the workmen's combinations from the political
> field.[^249]

The employer-worker relationship can, in an exploitative order, only be
hostile, bordering on violent antagonism. As the character of industrial
production changed, their own lives became a major preoccupation of the
workers, and their association or union had to take up issues concerning
their employment. Diminishing their right to associate with a political
party of their choice was a denial of that right. It led to a determined
campaign to change the law and overturn the Osborne judgement. The
Osborne case also highlights the fact that labour did not link itself
with the Conservative Party in the emergent political system. Abstract
theorising about rights does not explain these biases, which are
unconscious.

The Trade Disputes Act of 1906 laid down in Section 3 that any act done
in contemplation or furtherance of a trade dispute will not be
actionable merely because it induces some persons to break the contract
of employment, or because it interferes with the trade, business or
employment of some other person or with the right of some other person
to dispose of his capital or labour as he wishes. This was put to the
test in 1955.[^250] The Draughtmen's Union and the airline BOAC had an
agreement of 100% membership. Rookes was a member of the union and in
the employ of BOAC. In 1955 he resigned his membership from the union.
Two unpaid officials --- Bernard and Fiscal --- and a union official
informed BOAC that if Rookes was not removed in three days the men would
withdraw their labour. This led to Rookes initiating an action for
damages resulting from conspiracy and intimidation by the union.

The entire struggle has been to free union activities from the charge of
conspiracy and intimidation. While the criminal charge of conspiracy has
become obsolete and not in use after the repeal of the Combination Acts,
the charge of conspiracy and intimidation has been constantly renewed to
defeat every attempt to overcome adverse judgments. This particular
matter reached the House of Lords, all of whom agreed that despite
Sections 1 and 3, the union's action amounted to intimidation.

The Conservatives and their followers did not like the immunity and
extensive powers enjoyed by the trade unions. They went to the
electorate for a mandate to curb this power. Once elected, they
introduced the Industrial Relations Act, 1971, which came into force on
28 February 1972. This act, among other things, created a court
comprising a High Court judge and two or more lay members. This tribunal
enjoyed the powers of the High Court. The trade unions did not nominate
any representative to the tribunal. Although there was a provision for
doing so, the trade unions refused to register themselves under the act.
The Transport and General Workers Union was one such.

The act was put to the test soon after it came into force. Goods to be
transported by ships were no longer being brought to and from the ports
packed in sacks or bags or crates, to be loaded by cranes onto the
ships. The container system was replacing this method. This meant that
the amount of work at the ports went down drastically. The containers
were packed in warehouses far from the ports and loaded on or unloaded
from ships that had been specially built to accommodate them by
mechanical devices that used minimal labour. This provoked the ire of
labour. The shop stewards, without reference to their trade union,
called for a strike and the dockers at Liverpool would not admit trucks
carrying containers. They were then put on a blacklist. There was
similar 'blacking' at Hull. The issue was taken to the Industrial Court,
and the union, the powerful Transport and General Workers Union, was
fined. An appeal was allowed on the ground that the shop stewards at
Liverpool and Hull had acted on their own, so the union could not be
held responsible. But the House of Lords reversed the decision of the
court of appeal and restored the industrial court's order levying a fine
on the trade union.[^251]

The committal order on the London picketers by the industrial court, the
strike that soon followed, and the arrest of five dockers for disobeying
the orders of the industrial court led to a decision by the House of
Lords in Heaton that the trade union was not liable. The five dockers
got released.

The development of industrial and trade union law in England illustrates
the struggle between authority and the right to freedom of association.
The struggle was not over any political principle but with respect to
the right of trade unions to strike and also the practices of blacking,
closed shop, etc., which operated harshly on their members. The closed
shop, which follows usually from a union agreement, often results in
injustice to individual workers and could be harsh on those who are
forced to conform. The worker cannot resign from his/her membership, but
must resign from other unions. The agreement between the employer and
the union makes union membership a mandatory requirement for employment.
Secondary actions initiated by unions could affect third parties and
their right to carry on their business. Also, decisions taken by two
feuding unions may lead to the deprivation of a right or employment to
an individual workman without either a notice or any reference to him.
Such matters have been taken to the courts. There have been decisions
where the judges pleaded for defining and limiting the immunity of trade
unions. In Merkur Island Shipping Corporation, the court of appeals
bemoaned the loss of clarity in defining secondary actions.

In all these cases, the right to strike appears to be an adjunct to the
right to freedom of association. That is, associations are effective
because of picketing and strikes; these activities cannot be separated
from the freedom of association. The history of the trade union movement
demonstrates this. During the 1870s and the 1880s, the struggle between
labour and authority was always a tussle between the Conservative and
Labour Parties, who ruled England alternately. Although they did not
actually belong to any party, judges in England were either conservative
or liberal and very rarely totally left-wing. A leftist judge, alone in
a hostile system, was forced to throw in his lot with the liberal group
in the judiciary. Lord Denning, for instance, was called an anti-trade
union judge and his resignation was demanded.

In dealing with freedoms, any abstract theory of rights may not fit into
the dynamics of social change, which is what living in a society is all
about. The trade unions, after the collapse of Owenism and Chartism in
the 1930s and 1940s, settled down to collective bargaining, the main
function of freedom of association. But this too produced its own
distortions. While trade unions were fighting for their rights, they
were not mindful of the fact that they were violating the individual
rights of their members. Despite the 1980 and 1982 Employment Acts,
workers' freedoms have remained precarious. The European Court at
Strasbourg found in such cases that Article 11 of the European Human
Rights Convention, which had given workers the right to form or join a
trade union, had been violated, and it gave relief to the workers. Thus,
aggrieved persons are driven to international tribunals for redressal.

But the major problems with a claim to freedom in general and freedom of
association in particular derive from the theoretical parameters within
which these rights are absolute but also incapable of prediction with
certainty. When the freedom becomes contentious, the discourse ceases to
be academic. It is often characterised by belligerence, unless taken to
a court. Here the belligerence has to be suspended, as approaching an
institution of adjudication implies accepting its decision. But this
decision is not likely to be definite, as it is subject to reversal on
appeal or review during some other contentious issue by a larger bench
of the same court. It is further subject to the disposition of the
government, for political reasons or expediency. In the history of
British trade unions, from the Osborne case onwards, the expression in
furtherance of a dispute illustrates this position.

When an association claims political rights and contests the legitimacy
of the political power in authority, its activities get characterised as
seditious, conspiratorial, and as attempting to overthrow a government
established by law. Thus the associational right has an obverse side,
which is the offensive nature of its exercise.

The American experience has been no different. The working class used
the strike as a major weapon to improve its living conditions. The
workers were not organised in the early stages. According to Jeremy
Brecher, July 1877 marks the first great American mass strike, though it
may not be remembered as a memorable day.[^252] The railroad strike
which began in the small town of Martinsburg, West Virginia, became
known as the Great Upheaval and signaled the spontaneous realisation by
the workers that their coming together was the source of their strength,
and that the reason for coming together was to assert rights as distinct
from demands. To begin with, there was no concerted action. The concept
of associational strength was still in an inchoate state. Also, actions
to quell such uprisings were always brutal. The National Trade Union,
formed in 1834, and the Knights of Labour, established in 1869, were
perhaps the earliest organisations of workmen, and they professed no
revolutionary ideals. Their demand was to secure for workers full
enjoyment of the wealth they helped create; sufficient leisure to
develop their intellectual, moral and social faculties, and for
recreation and pleasure; and shorter working hours. Between 1836 and
1858, there were a number of general statutes limiting the working day.

Although the fulfillment of the demand for the eight-hour workday
represents a victory in the exercise of associational rights, the unfair
trial and execution of the leaders of the Haymarket strike represents
the underside of that victory --- the arraignment of 'revolutionary' trade
unionists on charges of treason in periods of crisis. Judges were
characterised by the workers as ministers of 'Capital' and the
legislature as its lackey:

> It silenced the preacher in the pulpit; it muzzled the editor at his
> desk; the professor in his lecture room. It set the price upon the
> heads of peaceful citizens; it robbed the mails and denounced the
> vital principles of the Declaration of Independence as treason.

The First World War led to abandoning rights altogether. President
Wilson held the view that once the people had spoken through their
Congressional representatives in favour of entering the war, there was
no scope for dissent. A young Presbyterian minister, Norman Thomas,
articulated the principle that the First Amendment (of the U.S.
Constitution) was the foundation of democracy and that tolerance for all
ideas provided a mechanism for orderly progress. He realised in 1917
that such views were heresy, for in June that year all anti-war and
socialist writings were banned. The Socialist Party leader, Eugene Debs,
was sentenced to a ten-year prison term for criticising the war in
general terms. Max Eastman's anti-war magazine was proscribed in the
appellate on the prevailing 'bad tendency' test, though Judge Learned
Hand prescribed tolerance of all methods of political agitation as a
safeguard for a free government. J. Edgar Hoover, a young clerk in the
FBI, was assigned the task of identifying political heretics. He
prepared profiles of 200,000 and detailed profiles of 60,000 persons.
The files were compiled on the basis of guilt by association. Those
marked were pacifists, labor radicals, socialists, black activists and
civil libertarians. Conscientious objectors were prosecuted. The
government's assaults on dissent were brazenly unlawful. Federal agents,
often without a warrant, descended on private homes. The offices of
political groups were ransacked and people were arrested. Though the
FBI's wrath fell on every dissenter, whatever his political views, it
was most unrelenting on Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) and the
Socialist Party. The witch-hunt of IWW members, known as Wobblies, was
very severe. In September 1917, a country-wide swoop took place on all
the offices of IWW; a few hundreds were arrested and 169 leaders were
prosecuted. When the National Civil Liberties Bureau, which came into
existence during this period, demanded fair trials and raised funds for
their defense, the administration felt that the NCLB rhetoric of free
speech a smoke-screen for revolutionary radicalism. The prosecution
ended in sentences of twenty years for 14 wobblies and ten-year terms
for 33 others.

This attitude of the state has an enduring and universal quality about
it. The infamous Palmer raids of the 1920s is a lasting testimony to the
opportunistic American faith in democracy, their own First Amendment and
to due process. The courts, under the constitutional system, were
independent of the executive, but certainly not independent of the
economic system running the country. The courts were not able to stand
outside the economic philosophy which justified the capitalist system,
its brutal practices and its propensity to negate democracy on the
slightest pretext. While the debate on whether human rights are
universal or not is not yet resolved, the violations of human rights has
been universal. The right to free speech is only available up to the
stage of declaration of war, and thereafter it ceases, ruled the courts.
Very often, the court defined freedoms in terms of their limits.

In the political sphere, free speech is related to the freedom of
association. Charles T. Schenck was the general secretary of the
Socialist Party. He was convicted for mailing anti-war and anti-draft
pamphlets to draft-age men, Schenck equated conscription to slavery and
urged the youth to resist. This theme was to recur in the 1970s when
there were widespread protests against the Vietnam War. Schenck's
pamphlets said, 'Do not submit to intimidation. Assert your rights.' It
was with reference to Schenck's anti-war position that Justice Holmes
laid down his doctrine of 'clear and present danger'.[^253] Were
Schenck's words, in the circumstances in which they were used, of such a
nature as to present a clear and present danger? Holmes' doctrine was
applied again in the prosecution that followed of yet another socialist,
Eugene Debs. His speech at a Socialist Party Convention earned him a
conviction, which was confirmed by the Supreme Court.[^254] Very soon,
this doctrine was further honed by Holmes himself, but more
significantly by Justice Louis Brandeis in the Anita Whitney case, where
he held that:

> no danger flowing from speech can be deemed clear and present, unless
> the incidence of the evil apprehended is so imminent that it may
> befall before there is opportunity for full discussion.[^255]

There was always a desire to sustain freedom of contracts while
declaring associational rights invalid. They were reading the laissez
faire principle into the Constitution. Only Holmes held that the 14th
Amendment did not enact Herbert Spencer's social statics. The history of
the period up to the Roosevelt era again demonstrates that the right to
livelihood drives workers to form unions to preserve and promote
employment. The decade of the Depression saw large sections of the
working class unemployed and facing eviction. It is in this context that
the Unemployed Citizens' League came into existence.[^256] It
organised self-help groups on a large scale, but by 1933 these had
collapsed. Then the New Deal and the National Recovery Administration of
President Franklin Roosevelt offered workers the hope that the
government would show them a way out of their misery and deprivation.
Roosevelt created a national relief system which effectively prevented
mass starvation. By Section 7A of his National Recovery Act, employees
were given the right to organise themselves collectively without any
restraint or hindrance from the employers. Previously, the trade unions,
including the American Federation of Labor (AFL), had not been in a
position to combat the wage cuts and lay-offs of the Depression. Until
the National Recovery Administration was formed, the American trade
union movement had been ineffective, with a considerable slump in union
membership. Once the government recognised collective bargaining through
the unions as part of the President's plan for economic recovery, union
membership registered an increase. But the New Deal also increased
governmental activity. The enormous increase in the federal government's
powers under New Deal policies carried with it inevitable fears of
inroads on the right to agitation. All the same, associations of
African-American workers came together to form the National Negro
Congress under the leadership of Randolph, who also worked tirelessly to
eliminate racism within the AFL. While racism continued to be an issue,
black unionists had emerged as a force for employers, the government and
organised labour to reckon with. The United Farm Workers, founded in the
early 1960s, brought together predominantly immigrant workers in the
southwest. It attracted hundreds of idealistic youth as volunteers in
direct actions, and grew into a social movement that secured the passage
of state legislation in 1970 guaranteeing farm workers the rights
already enjoyed by most other workers since the passage of the National
Labor Relations Act.[^257]

While it would be very interesting to map the growth of trade unionism
in different sectors, constituencies and regions, it is clearly beyond
the scope of the present exercise. This bare sketch of trade union
history and adjudication on the questions of associational freedom in
England and the United States is however necessary to place in context
the Indian experience, within and outside the courts, over the last five
decades.

The years after World War II, with its growing confrontation with the
Soviet Union, ushered in a 'cold war' in which liberal opinion became
suspect in the West and attitudes to constitutional rights coarsened.
There was all-round suspicion and associational freedoms were under
attack, more so if the unions were leftist or communist. Senator
McCarthy and his investigations into un-American activities are too well
known to be retold. But what is important to remember is that an assault
on free speech and association marks the suspension of democracy and
constitutional rights without effecting any constitutional change. All
the black movements were accused of being communist-inspired. In fact,
FBI agents identified as communist whoever was at ease with the blacks
or socialised with them. The fight for black equality was regarded as
communist inspired. The American Civil Liberties Union was in
difficulties, and its 'right to fight for rights' was questioned and
branded _anti-national_. This right remained in jeopardy until the fall of
the Soviet Union and the collapse of communist systems around the world.
With the emergence of globalisation, however, movements within countries
for social transformation received a major setback. Yet, today
associations that fight for an equitable order all over the globe
receive greater international understanding.

## Free Speech and the Colonial Legacy in India {#32_defining-right-as-wr.xhtml#heading-2}

Any revolution is social to the extent that it breaks up the old
society, and any revolution that overthrows an old ruling power is
political. To this formulation of Marx, Engels adds that every real
revolution is a social one; it brings a new class to power and allows it
to remodel society in its own image. The Russian Revolution was meant to
exemplify this idea, and since then revolution has always meant a
radical break in continuity and with the past. And the progress has
always been visualised as a movement towards a better society. India has
not witnessed a revolution. There was no desire, during the struggle
against British colonial rule, to restructure Indian society in social
and cultural terms; the struggle, although pluralistic in character,
aimed only at political emancipation. There were the communists who,
firmly tethered to Marxism, believed in armed and violent overthrow of
the British; there were the terrorists, who believed in the integrity of
India as a nation and on that basis organised political movements for a
violent overthrow of British rule. There was also a growing
Western-educated middle class with aspirations to leadership, but who
believed in securing emancipation by peaceful means. Gandhi gave their
movement an ethical content by his politics of non-cooperation and civil
disobedience. The last organised their entire politics on a complete
comprehension of liberalism as it had evolved in Britain and were adept
at using these liberal values in insurgent fashion.

The Indian Constitution consists of inalienable fundamental rights and a
group of non-justiciable rights, which have been termed fundamental
obligations. These values were, however, never subjected to severe test
until the country was enveloped by crisis and entrenched power blocs
were threatened by emerging political movements in various parts of the
country. But in these moments of crisis, the first and major assault has
always been on freedom of speech and expression. After Independence, the
first major political movements to question the way Indians were being
governed were the Nav Nirman Samiti of Gujarat, the Movement for
Democracy led by Jayaprakash Narayan in Bihar, and the _Naxalbari_
Movement in West Bengal, Andhra and Kerala.

Of these, the _Naxalbari_ movement was qualitatively different. It emerged
after two major splits in the Communist Party and brought back onto the
agenda the path of armed struggle for the overthrow of the Indian state
and for restructuring the society in accordance with Marxist-Leninist
and _Maoist_ principles. This movement had a large following among the
youth and it spread like a forest fire. In Andhra it arrived in
Srikakulam in 1968. Although the repressive machinery of the state swung
mercilessly into action against it, there was a large following of
teachers and writers, the former assuming leadership and the latter
breaking away from progressive writers' bodies and proclaiming
themselves revolutionary. Their writings put to test the definition of
sedition in independent India: should it continue to be interpreted as
did the British and their judges (whether British or native), or should
sedition contain the limitation which Gandhi implied?

When Gandhi was prosecuted for sedition in 1922, he made a memorable
statement to the court, in which one could identify the limitation which
ought to be placed on prosecutions for sedition:

> I am satisfied that many Englishmen and Indian officials honestly
> believe that they are administering one of the best systems devised in
> the world, and that India is making steady, though slow progress. They
> do not know that a subtle but effective system of terrorism, together
> with an organised system of force on the one hand, and the deprivation
> of all powers of retaliation or self-defence on the other have
> emasculated the people and induced in them the habit of simulation.
> This awful habit has been added to the self-deception of the
> administrators.
>
> \
>
> Section 124A, under which I am happily charged, is perhaps the prince
> among the political sections of the Indian Penal Code designed to
> suppress the liberty of the citizen. Affection cannot be manufactured
> or regulated by law. If one has no affection for a person or system,
> one should be free to give the fullest expression to his disaffection,
> so long as he does not contemplate, promote, or incite to violence.
>
> \
>
> I hold it to be a virtue to be disaffected towards a government, which
> in its totality has done more harm to India than any previous system.
> India is less manly under the British rule than she was ever before.
> Holding such a belief, I consider it to be a sin to have affection for
> such a system.[^258]

Gandhi is saying that sedition as a political offence must not be
docketed under the category of crime. He spells out a theory that
disaffection to oppressive governance is a right and disobedience to
such a government is no crime. Thus ideally, we should move towards a
system of jurisprudence and justice where limitations on prosecution for
sedition will become part of the adjudicatory process. For example,
criticising the government for failure to perform the fundamental
obligations set out in Part IV of the Constitution should not invite
prosecution for sedition. The Constitution's Preamble and Directives
prepare the ground for a redefinition of sedition, an interpretive
exercise in which the courts must adjudicate on the basis of the values
of the freedom struggle and their incorporation in the Constitution, We
are not concerned with the politics or values the revolutionary writers
believed in. In all these cases the question has always been whether the
government has forfeited its moral and constitutional claim to
obedience. When the possibility of peaceful social transformation
becomes impossible, political movements organised for bringing about
social change may plan to overthrow the government, even one established
by law, as according to them such a government has forfeited the claim
to continue. In such circumstances, the interests of free speech always
seem to lose over those of state security.

In fact, soon after Independence, the communist movement confronted the
courts on the issues of the extent of freedom under the preventive
detention law, freedom of association, freedom of speech and expression,
etc. The first major case was A.K. Gopalan's writ petition, sent from
the jail where he had been preventively detained. Gopalan was not
released on 15 August 1947; he celebrated Independence Day in solitary
confinement for having made a speech inside the jail after hoisting the
national flag. He was produced before the ADM, Calicut, the next day on
a charge of sedition, where he was accused of instigating the people
against the British king and emperor. He was not released by the ADM.
There were protests throughout Kerala. Gopalan went on hunger strike and
wrote to the provincial ministry of independent India:

> I was a political prisoner from 1930 to 1945 in the eyes of a foreign
> government. Under today's popular government I am branded as a
> criminal. The only reason I can find for this is that I am a
> communist.[^259]

This case provided an early clue to how the institutions were going to
define the freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution.

Gopalan's petition from jail questioned the validity of his detention,
as also the scope and ambit of Articles 22(3) to (5). Only
constitutional questions were debated but not the factual background of
the case. The entire debate became semantic, with no attempt being made
to define terms in the context of the history which preceded the
drafting of the Constitution Rights, which were to be the foundation of
our lawful government, came to occupy second place, while the
limitations on those rights became fundamental, the very subversion
Justice Vivian Bose had warned against.

Although the judges and lawyers who appeared in the case were part of
the generation that fought for Independence, they had not themselves
played a part in that struggle. They had received their training in the
colonial courts and therefore viewed fundamental rights as variants of
legal rights, not as qualitatively different from them. They viewed the
Constitution as a legal document to be interpreted formally and not as a
political document calling for an entirely new method of interpretation.
This is reflected in the decision in Gopalan's case. The court merely
explored the meaning of the words 'preventive detention' without taking
into account the ideological content of these words.[^260] Preventive
detention should not have the same meaning for a political person and a
smuggler, hoarder, hooligan or other such anti-social. When a political
person is detained, the intention is to restrict his speech, his
movements, his right to association, his entire political life. Treating
the limitations contained in Articles 22(3) to (5) as self-contained
foreclosed all debate on Gopalan's right to free speech, association and
movement. He had been preventively detained with the obvious intention
of thwarting these rights, and the grounds for his arrest ought to have
been tested for violation of these rights. To lump political persons
along with anti-socials is to ignore the mandate of Article 14, which
should normally inform all interpretive exercises by the courts.
Dissimilar categories grouped together violate the principle of
equality. The subjective assessment of the state, which is from the
perspective of public order and security, becomes the yardstick by which
the courts judge the issue of liberty. In this approach, the activities
of A.K. Gopalan and Haji Mastan and the disparate social consequences of
their activities are irrelevant.

Romesh Thapar's English weekly, Cross Roads, was very popular with
leftist students and intellectuals in Madras in my student days. Then
the Madras government banned the sale or distribution of this weekly
under the Madras Maintenance of Public Order Act, 1949, a
post-independence pre-Constitution law. At almost the same time,
Brijbushan, at the other end of the political spectrum, questioned the
pre-censorship of the Punjab magazine, Organiser, under the East Punjab
Public Safety Act. The courts, on strict interpretation of the
Constitution, decided these cases in favour of free speech. In the
Constitution as originally framed, Article 19(2) did not contain the
words 'public safety' and 'public order', and the courts held that a
threat to these could not be equated to a threat to 'national security'.
The courts treated the absence of the words 'public safety' and 'public
order' as mere omissions and also held that free speech includes the
right to circulate and to disseminate. The decision was overturned by
the Constitution First Amendment Act, 1951. By contrast, the First
Amendment to the American Constitution is the introduction of free
speech. It is reasonable to infer that the words public safety and
public order were not used as the framers felt that the Indians'
freedoms should not suffer abridgement on the slightest pretext. Thus,
the courts should have made the interpretation that the Constitution had
advisedly confined the abridgement of rights to situations where there
is a threat to national security.

V.G. Row of the well-known Madras lawyers' firm Row and Reddy,
established to take up leftist causes, was also the secretary of the
Madras Public Education Society. This society had been set up to
propagate the communist movement and its values. The Madras government
banned this society by invoking Section 15 of the Criminal Law Amendment
Act, 1908, for interfering with the administration's maintenance of law
and order and constituting a danger to public peace. It was declared an
unlawful association. The Madras government had exercised powers under
Section 15(2)(b) of the Madras (now Tamil Nadu) Amending Act, 1950, and
issued notification under Section 16 of this act. The Madras High Court
allowed a writ petition and the matter was carried to the Supreme Court
by the state of Madras. The Supreme Court examined the Madras Amendment
Act No. 11 of 1950.

Before setting out the amended provisions which came up for
consideration by the Supreme Court, it is necessary to understand the
scope and ambit of the terms used in the concerned sections. The term
'unlawful association' is defined as one which

\ 

\(a\) encourages or aids persons to commit acts of violence or
intimidation or whose members habitually commit such acts; or

\ 

\(b\) has been declared to be unlawful by the provincial government
under the powers conferred on it.

\ 

The Madras act amended Clause (b) of Section 15(2), and replaced Section
16 with Sections 16 and 16-A. While there is no amendement of Section
17, new Sections 17-A to F were added. Thus, what fell for consideration
before the Supreme Court was Section 15(2)(b), which is the principal
section in the act. It is this Tamil Nadu Amending Act which has been
adopted by the Andhra Pradesh Law (Amendment of Short Titles) Act, 1961,
under which it has been incorporated as the Indian Criminal Law
Amendment (Andhra Pradesh) (Andhra area) Act, IX of 1950, which is
applicable to those areas of Andhra Pradesh which were formerly part of
Madras Province.

Section 15(2)(b) of the Madras amendment continues the definition of an
unlawful association as one which

\ 

\(c\) has been declared by the state government by notification in the
Official Gazette to be unlawful on the ground (to be specified in the
notification) that such association:

\(i\) constitutes a danger to the public peace, etc.,

\(ii\) has interfered or interferes with the administration of the law
or has such interference for its object.

\ 

Section 16-A of the act provides for representation to the Advisory
Board in terms of the time fixed in the notification for making such
representations. Section 17-A empowers the government to notify and take
possession of places used for unlawful association. This was amended by
the addition of two subclauses, 2(a) and 2(b), which allows the party
dispossessed to approach the Chief Judge, Small Causes Court, or the
District Judge, according as the place notified is situated within the
presidency town or outside it, for a declaration that 'the place has not
been used for the purpose of any unlawful association'. If such a
declaration is made, the government must cancel the notification by
which it took possession of the place. Section 17-B empowers the officer
taking possession of a notified place to forfeit the movable property
found in the premises if he opines that such property 'is or may be
used' for the purpose of unlawful association, but only after following
the procedure indicated. Section 17-E empowers the government to forfeit
the funds of an unlawful association if it is satisfied, after enquiry,
that such funds are being or intended to be used for the purposes of
unlawful association. The procedure to be followed is also indicated.
Section 17-F prohibits the civil courts from entertaining any suit or
matter in respect of proceedings initiated under Sections 17-A to E of
the amended act.

The reasons for introducing this statute was explicitly to contain the
freedom struggle. Deshbandhu Chitta Ranjan Das, in his undelivered
address at the Gaya Congress, condemned this legislation. Satyamurti of
Madras, in his private members bill in the Council, called for the
repeal of all repressive laws, including this one. Despite this history,
the statute was adopted by presidential order for continuance in
independent India.

After examining the aforesaid provisions, the Supreme Court opined that:

> Giving due weight to all the considerations indicated above, we have
> come to the conclusion that Section 15(2)(b) cannot be upheld as
> falling within the limits of authorised restrictions on the right
> conferred by Article 19(1)(c). The right to form associations or
> unions has such wide and varied scope for its exercise, and its
> curtailment is fraught with such potential reactions in the religious,
> political and economic fields, that the vesting of authority in the
> executive government to impose restrictions on such right, without
> allowing the grounds of such imposition, both in their factual and
> legal aspects, to be duly rested in a judicial inquiry, is a strong
> element which, in our opinion, must be taken into account in judging
> the reasonableness of the restrictions imposed by Section 15(2)(b) on
> the exercise of the fundamental right under Act 19(1)(c); for no
> summary, and what is bound to be a largely one-sided review by an
> Advisory Board, even where its verdict is binding on the executive
> government, can be a substitute for a judicial enquiry. The formula of
> subjective satisfaction of the Government or of its officers, with an
> Advisory Board thrown in to review the materials on which the
> Government seeks to override a basic freedom guaranteed to the
> citizen, may be viewed as reasonable only in very exceptional
> circumstances and within the narrowest limits, and cannot receive
> judicial approval as a general pattern of reasonable restrictions on
> fundamental rights.[^261]

The court also dealt with the inadequacy of the notice periods and the
manner of publication of notice. Ultimately, it held that having regard
to the peculiar features to which references had been made, Section
15(2)(b) of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1908, amended by the
Criminal Law Amendment Act (Madras), 1950, falls outside the scope of
the restrictions under Clause 4 of Article 19, and is therefore
unconstitutional and void. The court went on to observe:

> We are unable to discover any reasonableness in the claim of the
> Government in seeking, by the mere declaration, to shut out judicial
> enquiry into the underlying facts under Clause (b). Secondly, the East
> Punjab Public Safety Act was a temporary enactment which was to be in
> force only for a year, and any order made thereunder was to expire at
> the termination of the Act. What may be regarded as a reasonable
> restriction imposed under such a statute will not necessarily be
> considered reasonable under the impugned Act, as the latter is a
> permanent measure, and any declaration made thereunder would continue
> in operation for an indefinite period until the Government should
> think fit to cancel it.[^262]

To summarise, the court struck down the ban order on the ground that it
violated freedom of speech and association as well. It was pointed out
that the principle of subjective satisfaction cannot be extended to the
rights covered by Article 19. Subsequently, however, the history of this
legislation has not been placed before the courts and no dispute has
ever been raised, whether inside Parliament or the courts, whenever an
occasion presented itself, about the propriety of adopting all the
repressive colonial laws in the statute books of independent India.

Keshavan Madhava Menon v. State of Bombay was yet another communist case
under the Indian Press (Emergency Powers) Act.[^263] The question
involved was the freedom of speech and expression. But far more
interesting is the dissenting opinion of Justice Vivian Bose in Krishnan
v. State of Madras.[^264]

In looking at the issue of preventive detention, Bose pointed out that
it was irrelevant whether or not the man for whom he was laying down the
law had any respect for the Constitution. He held that any statute on
preventive detention should specify a maximum period of incarceration.
Bose's powerful dissent was taken note of by the government and an
amendment to its preventive detention law was introduced providing for
such a maximum.

In all these cases, there has been no attempt at a radical
interpretation of the Constitution, or at forcing a discontinuity with
the colonial legal framework. There has not even been a consciousness of
the values inscribed in the Constitution. The communist movement,
influenced by Soviet thought on the subject, was not really interested
in the concept of the rule of law or its validity, even in a socialist
society. This concept has a long history; it evolved as a major check on
power and the arbitrariness it engenders. But our countrymen have never
been ready or willing to operate the legal system insurgently, and to
break the linguistic formalism into which the rule of law had became
trapped. The colonial legal structure was undoubtedly positivist in the
Austinian sense, and colonial governance claimed for itself absolute
powers to rule. The native population was put on probation to claim
eligibility for self-rule. This proved to be a drawn-out process. The
introduction of representative status to the native population in small
doses had the advantage of producing an elite leadership which would
rein in the emerging militant groups. This policy also led to the
introduction of natives into the civil service and the judiciary. But
the colonial legal structure manned by Indians did not produce any
spectacular judgments in favour of the freedom fighters. They had
thoroughly imbibed the British legal positivist approach and were quite
unprepared to handle the major issues of independent India in any other
manner by which the legal structure could enhance the quality of
governance and life. They had been trained to look into words, grammar
and punctuation; whether conjunctions are to be read as disjunctions or
vice versa; whether a singular should be read as a plural and whether
'he subsumes 'she', etc. Words are tools to understanding, but no one
looked beyond the words and the meaning they might yield to other
learned judges in similar or dissimilar circumstances. The problems that
confronted the courts were of linguistic expressions; it was felt that a
harmonious construction would tidy up the words.

In all the cases concerning the communists, the courts examined the
rights of the citizen before them on the basis of the words contained in
various statutes. In A.K. Gopalan, the debate was on the terms
'procedure established by law' and 'freedom of movement', and on the
difference between punitive and preventive detention. What was not
debated was how and in what manner and under what circumstances a
preventive detention law may act as a restraint on the freedom of speech
and freedom of association. As already pointed out, you do not imprison
political leaders for the reasons set out in any preventive detention
law. Rather, the government arrests these leaders to curb their freedom
of speech, association and movement. All these rights were treated as
irrelevant by construing Article 22 as a self-contained code. A
fundamental limitation on preventive detention was converted into a
shackle on liberty and it took over fifteen years to get rid of this
interpretive fetter. Romesh Thapar would not have led to immediate
amendment if the courts had interpreted the restraint more plausibly by
holding that the constitution-makers did not desire that free speech
should be restrained on the flimsy grounds of law and order and public
order.[^265] In V.G. Row, the court could have struck down the entire
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 1908, had they been forward-looking and
boldly innovative. Had they only looked at the statements of objects and
reasons, they could have passed strictures on the executive for having
adopted a law whose repeal every important national leader had demanded
of the British government.[^266]

Free speech and its companions, freedom of association and freedom of
movement, have transformative use and cannot be read disjunctively from
the people and their aspirations. These are political liberties in the
sense that politics is the driving force of social change and these
rights cannot be extrapolated from their social context and setting. A
constitutional provision has a separate status in a legal system. In
adjudicating whether a law is constitutional or violative of the
fundamental rights, the courts have a moral obligation to examine it
from the standpoint of the objectives of the Constitution: specifically,
whether the measure thwarts or promotes progress towards these goals and
whether the actions of those threatened with detention are a protest, a
complaint that the government has been working to thwart such progress.

The fundamental rights granted to individuals enables them to rally
collectively to discipline governance. This collective action by the
people may take various forms, always depending on the response or
absence of it. It is in such situations that the theory of power and the
theory of rights are tested in regard to which gets precedence. The
resulting decision on priority decides the fate of both institutions and
society.

## The State, Free Speech and the _Naxalite_ Movement in Andhra Pradesh {#32_defining-right-as-wr.xhtml#heading-3}

The schism with communist orthodoxy in India finally took place in
_Naxalbari_ in West Bengal. Charu Majumdar emerged as the new movement's
unrelenting spokesman. The emergence of the _Naxalbari_ movement coincided
with radical youth revolts in Europe and the U.S.A. Its new agenda was
based on the long tradition of Marx, Lenin, Stalin and Mao. The
Naxalbaris decided that recurring trade cycles would no longer swell the
ranks of the proletariat until a revolution became possible, Rather, it
would be brought about by armed peasant struggle under the leadership of
the working class. But the movement did not find its leadership in the
working class. Whatever course it had taken in the beginning, it
acquired a large following among the youth, and its leadership in Andhra
was provided by the teaching profession, who also provided it a radical
literary wing. Their writings depicted a totally bankrupt society, with
literary and art forms that were hollow, meaningless and ritualistic.
They rejected the traditional values of the Indian communist movement.
The _Naxalbari_ writers were inspired by the novelty of the Cultural
Revolution initiated by Mao. They bloomed as Mao desired them to.

A group of writers who called themselves the Digambara poets broke free
from pedestrian and obscure literary styles. A rickshaw puller released
their first collection of poetry. In Bengal, Samar Sen and Saroj Dutta
led the new literature that emerged with the _Naxalbari_ movement. They
made an attempt to liberate art and literary forms from the stifling
influence of Tagore, calling themselves the Bhuk Peedi poets. There was
freshness in the air, and hope and courage in the youth. Many felt that
a revolution Was around the corner. Even a mild-mannered poet like
Lochan from Warangal wrote a poem entitled 'With Your Fingers on the
Trigger'. A society called Swetcha Sahiti was formed in Warangal around
1968, and a collection of poems with the title Your Fingers on the
Trigger was published. The following year another collection came out
under the title Revolt. This breaking away from traditional literary
forms, always an attack on the existing social order, _encountered_ the
inevitable opposition. The whole situation was fluid.

As the Srikakulam peasant struggle gained momentum, students in Vizag
questioned the role of the famous traditional poet Sri Sri, asking him,
'On whose side are you?' This has always been a classic query of the
communist movement. At that time the question appeared relevant. The
Revolutionary Association was formed on July 4, 1970, with the declared
object of supporting the Srikakulam peasant struggle. By then the state
had unleashed its repression full throttle. The Madras Suppression of
Disturbances Act, 1947, was adopted in the year 1967 by Andhra Pradesh
and used successfully against the _Naxalite_ movement. It enabled the
state to notify affected tribal regions as 'disturbed areas', giving the
police enormous powers, including that of shooting to kill. The entire
northern coastal belt comprising Vizag, Srikakulam and East Godavari,
and the hinterland districts of Khammam, Warangal, Karimnagar and
Adilabad were under the grip of government repression characterised by a
brutality which far exceeded that employed by either the Nizam or the
British.

The Congress Party under Indira Gandhi lost its majority in five states
during this period. The direct result of this was her inability to carry
through the annual renewal of the Preventive Detention Act, 1950.
However, her government at the centre gave leave to the states to have
their own detention laws. Thus, the Andhra Pradesh Preventive Detention
Act, 1970, was brought onto the statute books. It was used against three
members of the Revolutionary Writers Association, Cherabanda Raju,
Nikhileswar and Jwalamukhi, who were arrested for their writings. To get
over the limitation imposed by Article 22(5) of the Constitution, the
legislature enacted a provision which reads:

> No detention order will be invalid or inoperative merely by reason
> that one or more of the grounds on which the detention order is made
> is or are vague or irrelevant, when the other ground or grounds does
> not or do not suffer from any such infirmity.

This needs some explanation and some background. Preventive detention
means jailing without trial; it is not punitive in character. At the
drafting stage of the Constitution, a mere assurance was considered
sufficient so that life and liberty were not taken away without
procedure established by law. This bland assurance did not satisfy many
members of the Constituent Assembly, who felt that Article 21 (then 15)
was a blank cheque to the executive. It was in these circumstances that
the present Article 22 was introduced. This extended positive assurances
that those arrested would be produced before a magistrate within 24
hours; that they would be entitled to the presence of a lawyer of their
choice; that incarceration would always be under the authority of a
statute passed for that purpose, which would provide for furnishing of
grounds immediately on arrest; that there would be a maximum period of
detention; that the case would be scrutinised by an advisory board
consisting of a sitting judge of the High Court and two retired judges.
There were other protections too. The furnishing of grounds of arrest
was a mandatory requirement. Based on the material placed before him,
the detaining authority has to satisfy himself that there exist grounds
for detaining the person arrested, and that every one of these grounds
is relevant: even if one ground is irrelevant or vague the detainee is
entitled to release. The courts have read this safeguard into the
constitutional provision.

Clause 5 of Article 22 specifies that the grounds of his arrest must be
communicated to the detainee, who must then be provided with a
reasonable opportunity to make a representation against his arrest. The
satisfaction of the detaining authority is subjective and therefore, to
be valid, the grounds have to be relevant, not vague. To redeem the
arbitrariness which will be present in every subjective formulation of
power, the courts have evolved this principle in favour of liberty. The
specific grounds or materials that persuades authority to act cannot be
predicted. Therefore, a single irrelevant ground is enough justification
to release the detainee. This interpretation was built into Clause 5 of
Article 22, and therefore became a constitutional guarantee. The Andhra
Pradesh Preventive Detention Act, 1970, tried to circumvent this
guarantee by legislating against the courts interpretation of Clause 5.
It was legislated that the existence of one ground that was relevant
among others that were not was sufficient to justify detention. It was
this that was questioned by the arrested writers. They also claimed a
poet's freedom to write. When Indira Gandhi nationalised the banks to
claim socialist credentials and refurbish her image, the statute she
used came under challenge. The principle in A.K. Gopalan, that Article
22 is a self-contained code and that the issues covered by this article
could not be tested for their validity with reference to the other
fundamental rights, was extended to the interpretation of property
rights in Articles 31, 31A, etc. Such an interpretation became an
obstacle to the successful challenge of the bank nationalisation act,
thus successfully challenging the validity of the reasoning in Gopalan.

This came in handy in the revolutionary writers case. Prosecuting them
for their writings put into focus the courts' definition of free speech
and how far this definition has helped us progress toward the
constitutional objectives after Independence.

The writers' case came before a bench presided over by Justice O.
Chinnappa Reddy and Justice A.D.V. Reddy. The hearing was totally
uninhibited and free. The courtroom was packed and our request to permit
the poets to read out the poems impugned by the detention orders was
acceded to. Cherabandaraju's wife, Shyamala, was present in the court.

Jwalamukhi read out his poem in a manner reminiscent of the actor Sivaji
Ganesan's dialogues in Tamil cinema. Nikhileswar, a mild and polished
person, read out his poem very well. But the best was Cherabandaraju's
reading. It was a fine satire on Indira Gandhi's socialism, set to
rhythm and tune. This device demonstrated the untenability of the
detention orders against these three poets. On examining the grounds of
arrest the court found that they were wholly irrelevant. Compelled to go
into the details of the act, the court found that the provision cited
violated the guarantee given by Clause 5 of Article 22. It dherefore
struck down the act as invalid. Striking down an enactment after testing
its validity with reference to free speech and expression was a major
step in understanding and interpreting our constitutional rights. But
this was only the decision of a state High Court and did not end the
repression to which radical writers were subjected in Andhra Pradesh,
which was already under an unproclaimed emergency.

It would, however, be interesting to examine the grounds for their
arrest. First, these grounds were common to all of them. This set the
pattern for the ensuing subversion of legal processes. It was not
Section 124A alone (that Gandhi described as the prince of Macaulay's
codes) which was pressed into service. Order was sought to be maintained
by preventively detaining a person so that his or her speech would not
be heard. The threat to the security of the state posed by the writers
was as follows. They had founded an association called Digambara Kavulu
and contributed verses to three volumes of poetry. This was an
association of angry men who believed in the ideas of Marx, Lenin and
Mao. Their poems mingled hope with destruction, and their references to
the propertied classes, blackmarketeers, followers of swamis, etc., were
vulgar, even sadistic. They instigated the famous poet of the people,
Sri Sri, to leave the Progressive Writers Association and found the
Revolutionary Writers Association, which then appealed to the president
of India to stay the execution of Kista Goud and Bhoomaiah, who had been
sentenced by the A.P. High Court. Finally, the writers' group also
criticised the government for suppressing civil liberties in the state.

Even today the state is trapped in abysmal ignorance. That
administration implies an understanding of the law and its proper
enforcement is a lesson that the state and its minions are still to
learn. While the grounds for detaining these writers were wholly
irrelevant, the court went on to point out the value of free speech in
eloquent terms. It relied on the excellent exposition of Justice Holmes,
where he talks about every idea being an incitement that should be
allowed to canvass for its own acceptance. Free speech should be
permitted, felt the judge, so long as there is no danger of imminent
public disorder, Justice Holmes pointed out that a distinction could be
made between an expression of opinion and incitement to violence based
on the speaker's desire. Commenting on the criminal propensities of the
communist ideology, he pronounced that the communist discourse then
before the U.S. Supreme Court had no chance of starting a conflagration.
Such was his confidence in American democracy and its ability to
withstand the communist onslaught. It was this confidence which made him
declare:

> If in the long run the beliefs expressed in proletarian dictatorship
> are destined to be accepted by the dominant forces of the community,
> the only meaning of free speech is that they should be given their
> chance to have their way.

In the long run, the forces and ideas fighting for dominance will have a
chance if they are allowed to propagate freely without early
intervention by the stifling of free speech. An idea becomes an
incitement if it attacks the social order and for that very reason
secures a following from the vast majority of totally marginalised
peoples kept in unspeakable penury and indignity. Justice Chinnappa
Reddy, following the trend set by Justice Holmes, describes poetry as
the spontaneous outpouring of powerful feelings, where passion and
extravagance go hand in hand:

> These cannot have any rational connection with public disorder. Were
> these three poets creating public disorder by breaking with the poetic
> tradition and writing about the social forces at war with status quo?
> Can their writings be dissociated from the revolutionary movement and
> described in abstract as outpourings of restless souls looking for
> light? If the Constitution itself provides the objectives and the
> obligations, should forces working for change be condemned as
> criminal?[^267]

It is not enough to dodge the law intelligently and secure either
personal liberty or free speech; rather, these must be based firmly on
rights. Jurisprudentially and within the legal system, the forces
working for social change should not be characterised as criminal or as
a threat to security. As long as the right to bring about social change
remains unrecognised in law, changes will continue to be partisan and
violent. If the state is defeated in its effort to contain freedom using
one enactment, it will pull another out of its quiver and employ this to
contain freedom a second time and on the same grounds. That is what
happened to the revolutionary writers. The same writings banned already
became a subject of criminal prosecution for sedition and conspiracy to
wage war and overthrow the government.

Prior to the arrests of the writers, three volumes of their
poems --- Jhanjha, March and Le --- were proscribed under Section 99 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. The poems in these collections were declared
seditious, based on the report of an official translator in the police
department. They were notified as proscribed in the official Gazette,
and all copies of the books were seized. It is open to an affected or
interested party to apply to have a proscribing order heard by a special
bench of three judges and revoked. Jwalamukhi filed the application and
the matter came up before Justices Obul Reddi, Sriramulu and Madhava
Reddi. Two of these judges upheld the order but Justice Madhava Reddi
wrote a dissenting judgment, which is remembered. He described Marxism
as a theory that deals with economic, social and political justice, one
that has become part of school and college curricula:

> These poems only educate the literate Telugu people in these ideas and
> theories, but as observed by Justice Holmes, 'every idea is an
> incitement' and the propagation of every such idea cannot, in my
> opinion, be termed seditious.[^268]

He did not believe that circulating these poems would kindle a flame, or
that they would create public disorder or violence in the immediate
future. The majority judgment, on the contrary, held them to be
seditious on the basis of the judgment rendered in the case of Bal
Gangadhar Tilak and other freedom fighters. Le (meaning 'Arise') came
before the same bench. The poems in this volume were of the same tenor.
They criticised our warring with China as a way of resolving border
disputes. The criticism was of war as an instrument for resolving any
dispute. There was also a poem criticising the role of the courts in a
class-based society; it extolled armed revolution as the only way to put
an end to exploitation. After receiving adverse judgments for Jhanjha
and March, the traditional precedent-oriented method would have led
again to sedition. Instead, I produced before the court copies of the
poems 'On Liberty' by Robert Burns, 'After Blenheim' by Robert Southey,
a poem by Dylan Thomas, some writings of D.H. Lawrence and others
traversing the subjects which these poets had written about. I read out
some of these poems and not much more argument was needed to convince
the same bench that the proscribing order must be lifted. In a four-line
order, the bench quashed the order proscribing Le.

In Andhra Pradesh between 1969 and 1974, around 22 conspiracy cases were
initiated against the Srikakulam movement and its participants.
Principal among them were the Parvathipuram case, the Nagi Reddy
conspiracy case, and the Secunderabad conspiracy case. In the last, the
accused were the principal members of the Revolutionary Writers
Association and others, including Kondapalli Seetharamaiah. The sessions
judge who finally heard this case and delivered the judgment was Rama
Sarma. He divided the accused into two categories: writers and
activists.

Among the writers were Jwalamukhi, Nikhileshwar, Cherabandaraju,
Nagnamuni, Ranganatham, M.T. Khan, Raja Lochan, K.V. Ramana Reddy,
Tripuraneni Madhusudan Rao, B. Tharakam, Vasireddi Seetha Devi and Vara
Vara Rao. Like Sartre, all of them believed:

> If I am given this world with its injustices, it is not so that I may
> contemplate them coldly, but that I might animate them with my
> indignation, that I might disclose them and create with their nature
> as injustices.

To criticise the violence unleashed by the state can never be seditious,
unless we fall back on the precedents set by Strachey or Justice Davar
against Bal Gangadhar Tilak. Yet the writings of the revolutionary
writers were proscribed. Successive experiences like this should make us
look beyond the events of the moment, if only to preserve democratic
values, for the only regime in which writing has any meaning is
democracy.

A threat to a writer is a threat to democracy. Thus, a clerk or a
blacksmith may be personally affected by fascism, which does not,
however, obstruct the practice of his calling. But repression affects
both a writer and his work. A writer contests the values entrenched in
the regime through the act of writing about them. The writer's fight has
been against absolutism since the time of Milton, so that 'the
determination of true and false, of what to be published and what to be
suppressed, might not be in the hands of the few who may be charged with
the inspection of books: men commonly without learning and of vulgar
judgment and by whose license and pleasure no one is suffered to publish
that which may be above vulgar apprehension.' When the government is in
perpetual insurrection against its own people, it is plagued by fear and
can never rise above 'vulgar apprehension'.

The cases against the revolutionary writers was intended to contain the
Srikakulam movement and the spread of this peasant uprising to the
backward Telangana region that had already witnessed an armed uprising
organised by the communists. The uniqueness of the Srikakulam armed
uprising lies in the very positive role played in it by these and other
writers. Neither by their preventive detention nor by proscribing their
writings has this aspect has come through clearly. It is not as if they
had no role to play in encouraging the youth to join the ranks of the
revolutionaries. Large numbers of young people read their writings and
were enthused to join the movement or remain steadfast sympathisers. The
court's perception that their writings had limited reach and could not
lead to an immediate conflagration was naïve. It was unprepared to
structure an alternative jurisprudence based on the right to social
change in the pursuit of equality and human dignity. The result is a
patchwork version of British colonial jurisprudence, where power
continued to limit rights. Eratism mixed with the rhetoric of rights is
all that we have been given by the interpretations of the court.

The case went on for a full fifteeen years. The sessions court was
itself listed in the telephone directory as the Revolutionary Writers
Court! These writers were not just prosecuted under 124A IPC. They were
prosecuted for waging war, conspiracy to wage war and other provisions
under the chapter on offences against the state --- the political crimes
of our penal code. The earlier prosecutions, the preventive arrests, the
proscribing of their writings and the decisions rendered by the court in
those matters were totally ignored. Double jeopardy, too technically
defined, enabled repetitious prosecution in different courts of
concurrent jurisdictions, and the conspiracy charge enabled the state to
prosecute them over again for conspiracy to commit the offences for
which they had already been charged and prosecuted. These methods had
the approval of the courts because they looked at these cases from the
perspective of the jurisprudence of power and not from the point of view
of rights. The Marxism classes the writers taught, their literary
discussions and their public meetings were all treated as conspiratorial
and seditious. Reacting strongly to the atrocities committed by the Nazi
regime, Gustav Radbruch, a German jurist, arrived at this formulation:

> Where the violation of justice reaches so intolerable a degree that
> the rule becomes in fact 'lawless law', the law has no claim to
> obedience.[^269]

It is interesting that similar positions were taken by Tilak, C.R. Das
and Gandhi. There are continuities between the colonial and
post-colonial periods, and disturbing parallels between the measures
introduced by the British to counter conspiracy and sedition and the
period between 1967 and 1975 when the independent Indian state found
itself going through the same exercise, this time too to counter
political unrest against an increasingly repressive state.

## The Media and Freedom of Expression {#32_defining-right-as-wr.xhtml#heading-4}

The media regards freedom of speech and expression primarily in business
terms. It trades in freedom of speech at the proprietorial and
entrepreneurial level, but it is a livelihood for the employees, from
the editors down to the stringer in the rural area. In a sense
therefore, the quality and content of our right to free speech and
expression is determined by profits for the media owners and job
security for the employees working in the media.

In 1958, the Express group of newspapers contended before the Supreme
Court that the Working Journalists Act constituted an impediment to a
free press and therefore violated the free speech and expression
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. The media company
Bennett Coleman brought the right to free speech into the debate by
impugning the newsprint policy passed by the government under the Import
Control Act, 1947. In his dissenting judgment, Justice Mathew pointed
out the dangers a monopoly press may pose to free speech and was of the
view that a monopoly in opinion was a worse tyranny than one in
commerce. Whether taxing newspapers would be a restraint on free speech
was brought up again by the Indian Express, Bombay, in 1986 before the
Supreme Court. In all these cases, businesses have raised the slogan of
free speech for commercial advantage. They are attempts to provide
business security to the media. Our media enterprises claim to be
champions of free speech and the cause of democracy, and no doubt some
of them stood up against the imposition of Emergency in 1975 and the
politically oppressive system it sought to legitimise. One could
speculate whether, if Indira Gandhi had been notably anti-Soviet and
pro-American at that time, the press would have taken a similar stand.
Business expediency and exigency dictate the media's politics. This is a
major limitation on the freedom of speech and therefore a self-imposed
limitation on the freedom of the press. Like every institution of the
state, the media too claims neutrality between the rich and powerful on
the one hand and the poor and deprived on the other.

Another major limiting factor is the job security of employees in the
media. It is true that quite a few have served for long periods and
retired, but that has always been at a price. The risk of loss of
livelihood acts as a major constraint on the free practice of the
profession of journalism. In countless instances, experienced editors
have been shown the door for not conforming to the management's stated
or unstated policies. The third major constraint on a free press is the
largesse which governments bestow on particular journalists, not as a
charitable act or in furtherance of their right to livelihood, but to
regulate the flow of information to the public without any visible
control. Despite these and other constraints, our media is private and
formal censorship is absent, so we find them exposing governmental
malfeasance as also that in the corporate sector. Media exposés have led
to the initiation of public interest litigation.

An alternative to the press as presently constituted is to set up
democratic media that addresses the issues faced by the working class
and other deprived sections. Workers in the organised and unorganised
sectors, _Dalits_, women and other deprived communities, who collectively
have the potential and the strength to bring about social, economic and
cultural transformation, need an alternative media, a radical press,
because their issues and the problems they face very often go
unrepresented in the mainstream media. However, because these sections
are so fragmented, the dream remains unfulfilled. Many groups have their
own news bulletins and sheets. There was until the split of the
communist movement an alternative media for the working class. But the
left is now so fragmented that circulations are limited to the
respective churchgoers. Setting up a left-wing or broad-based democratic
press appears to be impossible at this juncture. The national print
media and its language counterparts are like the curate's egg, good in
patches. We should strive to increase the good patches and negate the
idiom if we are interested in preserving democracy. By the very nature
of its business, the press is often compelled to take a stand on issues
of free speech. Thus we found the Indian Express and the Statesman
defying Emergency. Quite a few language papers left their editorial
columns blank on 26 June 1975. The tradition of independence is one
basic character which the press has always claimed. Similarly, there
have been fine editors who have been uncompromising on the question of
freedom of the press: witness Kuldip Nayar courting arrest in defiance
of Emergency. It is always a few who lend credibility to institutions. A
few uncompromising judges have been largely responsible for the
credibility of the judiciary. It was not the progressive judges but a
few conservatives who set aside Emergency detention orders in Andhra
Pradesh, and it is Justice Khanna who alone in the Supreme Court had the
courage and conviction to pronounce the Maintenance of Internal Security
Act invalid. When he was superseded there was not even a murmur of
protest from the other judges. I do not know how many journalists
protested the arrest of Kuldip Nayar.

It was during the period immediately preceding Emergency, when the
_Naxalite_ movement gained ground in Andhra and other parts of the country
and the movement led by Jayaprakash Narayan grew rapidly in Bihar and
elsewhere, that investigative journalism was born in India. The media
played major roles again during the anti-reservation stir, Advani's Rath
Yatra, the destruction of the Babri Masjid and during various communal
riots. The press showed itself openly against reservation, never
perceiving it as a facet of equality. There were no screaming headlines
when those rampaging against reservation destroyed public transport and
public property. The agitation was portrayed as a fight for the
retention of merit in education and employment. The press used
photographs of self-immolation by young misinformed students as a
powerful statement against reservation. This was one instance where the
views of the management coincided with those of the reporters, and it
made the press more undemocratic. It is pointless to belabour the rank
communal nature of the Rath Yatra and the demolition of the mosque. Some
English-language and vernacular papers lent their support, overt and
covert, to these ventures, without realising their responsibility of
protecting the minorities and assuring them equality of treatment in law
and society. This is all the more necessary now, as other minorities are
being targeted.

The way the politics of violence gets represented in the media is
interesting. During the Emergency and shortly thereafter, the coverage
of atrocities against the radical left was fairly democratic, as was the
coverage of Justice Bhargava's commission of inquiry into encounter
killings. Although there is no separate human rights space in the
newspapers, this subject gets fairly good and prominent coverage. Yet
there has been practically no editorial support for human rights
campaigns. For instance, the A.P. government killed 275 people in
encounters in 1998 and the following year over 130 persons. While every
one of these deaths was reported, there has been no editorial comment
condemning them in unequivocal terms.

There has been a gradual shift in media emphasis from state violence to
political violence with the rise of Khalistan militancy in Punjab, the
increase in violence in the North-East and the continuing _Naxalite_
violence in Andhra Pradesh. The violence in Jammu and Kashmir is
reported according to the political exigencies of the ruling party. All
these regions of political turbulence abound with violations of human
rights till they become endemic. Yet these violations do not get
reflected in the news media, either electronic or print. Human rights
stories often do not get told because reporters in rural areas are
afraid of being implicated as terrorists. For instance, in the Adilabad
region of Andhra Pradesh, rural stringers of Telugu newspapers were
charged under TADA for reporting on police harassment and encounters.
Editorial policy has undergone a change after the appearance of 'the
terrorist' and after political dissent outside the parliamentary system
has been redefined as and subsumed under the all-encompassing category
'terrorist violence'. As a result, state violence against _Naxalites_ and
other militant and dissident groups does not receive the focus it ought
to. This is not to understate the character of some of these political
movements, who use violence not only against innocent people but also
against the press, their offices, editors and journalists. Instances
have never been wanting: The Tribune in Punjab, the Punjab Kesari and
the Srinagar Times. This is a reality the press has to face when it
operates in politically turbulent areas. Civil liberties activists have
been mauled and gunned down by the police, but these are the hazards of
conscience-keepers in turbulent times. They cannot however be an excuse
for refraining from reporting or exposing state violence. These are
actions beyond the limits of law and should be seen and written about as
such.

There is a U.N. General Assembly resolution that extrajudicial killings
have to be investigated and the culprits punished. There is a similar
resolution with regard to disappearances. The press, more than any other
institution, has the responsibility to expose human rights violations
and not judge whether or not they are newsworthy. To do so would, in
fact, be a human rights violation, particularly if there were no
follow-up after reporting. The official violence during the tenure of
Police Commissioners Ribeiro and Gill in Punjab went largely unnoticed.
On the contrary, the chorus of protest by the editors of almost all the
major newspapers when Gill was punished for misbehaviour with a female
official demonstrated their attitude to human rights. Constantly
projecting terrorist violence in the media only legitimises police
violence against the villagers, who have always been the immediate
suspects and therefore victims of illegal custody, torture and custodial
rape.

The muzzling of political dissent and even the shooting of criminals
should not be permitted to become part of administrative practice, as is
true today in several states in the country, notably Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh, the states in the North-East, Punjab, West
Bengal, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. During the Kargil war, the rapid
escalation of the conflict and the return of the bodies of dead soldiers
were both reported in chilling and voyeuristic detail by the electronic
media, resulting in a war hysteria which masqueraded as patriotism and
nationalism. In situations like this, fascism is not far behind, as
Gujarat has recently demonstrated. Only an informed press --- both editors
and reporters --- has the reach to campaign for democracy against such
febrile and delirious trends in the body politic.

## Banning Organisations {#32_defining-right-as-wr.xhtml#heading-5}

Two orders were issued by the government of Andhra Pradesh, one for the
Andhra area and the other for Telangana. The Criminal Law Amendment Act
of 1908, a statute that was struck down decades ago, was used for the
Andhra area and the truncated Hyderabad Public Security Act 1348 Fasli
for Telangana. Under the former act the banning notification was issued
under Section 15(2)(b) of the Indian Criminal Law Amendment (Madras) Act
of 1950.

More recently, Deendar Anjuman was banned under the Unlawful Activities
Prevention Act of 1967. The ban was confirmed by a tribunal headed by a
High Court judge. The Peoples' War Group and Deendar were banned under
two separate enactments. These are not purely legal issues. They are
seen and experienced as injustices, making the resulting disorder
intractable. The activities of these organisations were not new. They
have been with us from the dawn of Independence. After decades of
protest yielded no result, all of them turned violent, as if saying the
state does not have a monopoly any more on the use of force.

The Peoples' War Group has been under a _de facto_ ban for over two
decades now. The _de jure_ ban is meant to muzzle human rights
organisations and the news media. Editors are contacted by phone and
asked to cooperate with the authorities, as if they were friendly
fascists, while the reporters and stringers in the rural areas are
threatened. They are told that reporting encounters, deaths in custody,
or publishing the statements of the PWG will be construed as aiding and
encouraging unlawful activities and will be looked upon as interference
with the administration of law and order.

An atmosphere of fear has been generated that brings all protest within
the definition of militancy and terrorism, and a range of
organisations --- active and defunct --- have been branded as secessionist.
Even before the Prevention of Terrorism Ordinance (POTO) was passed, the
state had notified all militant organisations operating in Jammu and
Kashmir, the United Liberation Front of Assam, the National Democratic
Front of Bodoland-Peoples Liberation Army, the United Liberation Front,
the Manipur Peoples Front, the All Tripura Tiger Force, the National
Liberation Front of Tripura, a few other organisations of recent origin
in the North-Eastern states, the currently defunct organisations Babbar
Khalsa International, Khalistan Commando Force, Khalistan Zindabad Force
and the International Sikh Youth Federation, and even the Peoples' War
Group in Andhra Pradesh, which was already under a state ban. All these
organisations represent minority groups, indigenous/_adivasi_ groups or
communists, and most have self-determination as central on their
agendas. They have grown over the last fifty years, during which
resistance to decaying governance has been treated as a law and order
problem to be crushed by the untrammeled use of special repressive laws
which are still in place.

POTO is more effective than large-scale arrests under a preventive
detention law, which can invite publicity. A district court is a
low-profile, low-priority institution. The ordinance has power to ban
the right to association. Our incipient Supreme Court ruled in 1952 that
this and other rights could not be restrained on the basis of subjective
satisfaction, as was adequate for preventive detention. The prevailing
law is that the deprivation of this right has to be on the basis of
objective adjudication. However, today a growing number of people
welcome the suspension of rights under the spurious belief that this
will wipe out terrorism. And the judiciary is as always under pressure
by the ruling parties to succumb to the imperative of repressive
governance as the only answer to increasing resistance.

## The Question of Academic Freedom {#32_defining-right-as-wr.xhtml#heading-6}

The Supreme Court in 1994, in Gajanan Vishweshwar Birjur,[^270]
pointed out that thought control was alien to our constitutional scheme
and values. It went on to say that suppressing ideas only drove them
underground. As a policy, suppression can never be successful. Any
surface serenity it creates will be false. Our Constitution permits free
trade in ideas, said the court. This is an expression used by the U.S.
Supreme Court. The Holmes-Brandeis tradition, which has been commended
by our court, is a complete vindication of the right to free speech.

In Abrams, Justice Holmes spoke about free trade in ideas. The issue was
the language used in two leaflets published by Russian immigrants who
claimed that they were socialists and anarchists who supported the
Russian Revolution. This was immediately after the seizure of power by
the Bolsheviks. In that context, delivering the dissenting judgment,
Justice Holmes said:

> But men have realised that time has upset many fighting faiths, They
> may come to believe that the ultimate good is better reached by free
> trade in ideas --- that the best test of truth is the power of the
> thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market, and
> truth is the only ground upon which their wishes can be carried out.
> That at any rate is the theory of our Constitution. It is an
> experiment, as all life is an experiment. Every year, if not every
> day, we have to wager our salvation on some prophecy based upon
> imperfect knowledge.[^271]

Continuing this thought, Justice Brandeis pointed out that men had burnt
women as witches out of fear, and that the function of free speech was
to free them from the bondage of such irrational fears. He then
proceeded to set down the ambit and scope of free speech:

> If there be time to expose through discussion the falsehood and
> fallacies, to avert the evil by the process of education, the remedy
> to be applied is more speech, not enforced silence ... Such must be the
> rule if authority is to be reconciled with freedom. Such in my opinion
> is the command of the Constitution.[^272]

This should be the perspective except in periods of grave emergency. It
formed the basis of Justice Madhava Reddy's dissenting opinion when a
collection of poems entitled March was proscribed by the government of
Andhra Pradesh. It was this dissenting judgment which was upheld by the
Supreme Court when our High Court had acted to proscribe. Justice Iyer
recommended to the government the dictum of Mao: 'Let a thousand flowers
bloom.' The Holmes-Brandeis tradition informed our approach to free
speech.

Kancha Ilaiah's 'Spiritual Fascism and Civil Society', published in the
Deccan Chronicle of 15 February 2000, invited censure from the registrar
of Osmania University, couched in the form of advice. Copies of the
registrar's letter, dated 6 May 2000, were marked to the secretary and
vice-chancellor of the university and to the principal of the University
College of Arts and Science. Clearly, the letter was an official
communication that would go into Ilaiah's personal file. The second
paragraph of this letter reads:

> Basically being teachers, we are bound to contribute towards
> upliftment of society, of every segment of society, promote social
> harmony and emotional integration. We have to positively ensure that
> either our writings or any other action do not in any way lend a slant
> to accentuating existing prejudices and inflame hatred among different
> sections of the people. You are requested to keep these in mind and
> discharge your role as a teacher with greater vigour and vitality to
> the betterment of the society as a whole.[^273]

The letter is a finding and a censure rolled into one. The cited
paragraph sets out parameters for academic writing, not only for Dr.
Ilaiah but for others as well, and raises questions on free speech and
academic freedom. Ilaiah's writing focuses on the unfulfilled promises
made in the Constitution and on the views of Dr. Ambedkar. In the
article in question, he touches upon the RSS, Godse and the like without
being vitriolic. But that is the point. Genuine criticism is more than
defamatory or vitriolic. It unsettles and upstages the wielders of
power.

While Dr. Ilaiah was not accused of sedition, is it right to say his
writing sparked hatred between castes and communities? Can a citizen who
works for the abolition of the caste system be accused of promoting
hatred between castes? A misconceived approach to these issues may bring
about preventable results.

In 1986, a citizen moved a petition in the Calcutta High Court to ban
the Koran. He wanted the court to direct that all copies of this book be
forfeited to the state. The petition was dismissed, but not before the
court pointed out that the petitioner had acted in a manner to promote
hatred between the communities. In 1988, someone wanted the courts to
withdraw the license to screen the film Tamas, based on Bhisham Sahni's
story about Partition. The film portrayed the carnage and violence that
happened during that period. The case reached the Supreme Court, which
refused to grant the request. As with the article in the Deccan
Chronicle, the petitioner was of the view that the violence depicted in
the film would incite further communal violence. But the court held that
depicting history was not an offence: 'It is out of the tragic
experience of the past that we can fashion our present in a rational and
reasonable manner and view our future with wisdom and care. Awareness in
proper light is a first step towards realisation.'[^274]

## Conclusion {#32_defining-right-as-wr.xhtml#heading-7}

The Constitution of India guarantees that caste, race, religion and sex
are irrelevant considerations in the social and economic life of the
people; that every person has a right of access to public tanks, places
of public resort, hotels, etc.; that every person has a right to enter
places of public worship; that Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and
backward classes, on account of centuries of social deprivation, are
entitled to protection, and that their right to reservation of seats in
education and jobs in government services are a part of the equality
assured in Articles 15 and 16 of the Constitution. In view of the
plurality of religions and sects in our country, freedom of conscience
has been guaranteed. Bonded labour and child labour have been abolished.
The Constitution's Directive Principles and Preamble clearly set out the
duties of the state and its institutions and the objectives to be
achieved by them.

Yet, more than fifty years later, no institution in this country is
totally committed to the realisation of these constitutional goals. A
party whose members swore to uphold the Constitution when they entered
Parliament brought down a government for upholding the principles of
secularism and reservation, and then pleaded for an uninterrupted
five-year period for themselves. Bonded labour and child labour abound
despite subsequent legislation to regulate or eliminate these practices.
Violence against women and discrimination against them continue.
Violence against _Dalits_ and _Adivasis_ are on the increase, despite
special penal legislation passed twenty-five years after the
Constitution to check it. Social and economic deprivation and misery are
on the increase. Most of this is borne by the _Dalits_ and backward
classes. Attacks on religious minorities, two for the present, are on
the increase. In many rural areas untouchability, including barring of
temple entry, is still practised. Those speaking out against this gross
injustice have, for over three decades now, faced the banning of free
speech and the right to free association.



[^242]:
G.M. Trevelyan, History of England, London: Longmans, 1962, p. 567.

[^243]:
Sidney Webb and Beatrice Webb (1894), The History of Trade Unionism,
New York: Augustus M. Kelley. 1965. The mere sight of a large mass
of workers unionising themselves is even now seen as intimidation, a
threat to Security and public peace.

[^244]:
\(1889). 2 QBD 598; (1892), AC 25.

[^245]:
Taff Vale Railway Company (1901), AC 426.

[^246]:
Sidney Webb and Beatrice Webb, _loc. cit._

[^247]:
Quinn v. Leatherns (1901), AC 495.

[^248]:
Osborne v. Amalgamated Society of Railway Servants (1911), 1 Ch 540.

[^249]:
Sidney Webb and Beatrice Webb, _loc. cit._, p. 626.

[^250]:
Rookes v. Barnard (1964), AC 1129.

[^251]:
\(1973), AC 15.

[^252]:
Jeremy Brecher, Strike!, Boston, Mass.: South End Press, 1972.

[^253]:
The question in every case is whether the words used in such
circumstances are of such a nature as to create a clear and present
danger that they will bring about the substantive evils that
Congress has a right to prevent Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, in
Schenck vs. United States, 249 US 47 (1919).

[^254]:
Samuel Walker, In Defence of American Liberties: A History of the
ACLU, New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.

[^255]:
Whitney vs. California, 274 US 357 (1927).

[^256]:
Jeremy Brecher, _loc. cit._

[^257]:
Michael D. Yates, Why Unions Matter, New York: Monthly Review Press,
1998, pp. 114--115.

[^258]:
Statement to Judge Broomfield, 1922.

[^259]:
A.K. Gopalan, In the Cause of the People: Autobiographical
Reminiscences, Madras: Sangam Books, 1976, p. 168.

[^260]:
For a more detailed discussion see Chapter _Personal Liberty after Independence_.

[^261]:
State of Madras v. V.G. Row, AIR 1952, SC 196.

[^262]:
State of Madras v. V.G. Row, AIR 1952, SC 196.

[^263]:
Keshavan Madhava Menon v. State of Bombay, AIR 1951 SC 128.

[^264]:
Krishnan v. State of Madras, AIR 1951, SC 301. For a detailed
discussion of this case see Chapter _Personal Liberty after Independence_.

[^265]:
Romesh Thapar v. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 594.

[^266]:
For a discussion on the debates surrounding the Criminal Law
Amendment Acts, see Chapter _Colonial Baggage_.

[^267]:
Jwalamukhi da Ors. v. State of A.P., 1972.

[^268]:
Justice Madhava Reddi, in Jwalamukhi v. State of AP., ILR 1973. AP 114. The dissenting opinion of Madhava Reddi was upheld by the
Supreme Court in The State of Uttar Pradesh v. Lalai Singh Yadav,
1976 SCC (Cri) 556.

[^269]:
W. Friedmann, Legal Theory, London: Stevens and Sons Ltd., 1967, p. 351.

[^270]:
Gajanan Vishweshar Birjur v. Union of India, (1994) 5 SCC 550.

[^271]:
Abrams v. United States, 250 US 616 (1919).

[^272]:
Whitney v. California, 274 US 357 (1927).

[^273]:
Emphasis added.

[^274]:
Ramesh Chotalal Dalal v. Union of India and Others, AIR 1988 SC 775.
