# Coca-Cola and the Peoples' War Group

The world is currently resounding with American violence. Amidst this
earth-shaking violence, nobody is taking any notice of the violence
indulged in by the Peoples' War Group. Compared to the scale of violence
one has witnessed since September 11, 2001, that of the Peoples' War
Group (PWG) looks very retail, as if they were small-time hoods in rural
India. But if we cannot condemn American violence, we have no right to
condemn any form of violence. The TV programme, 'The Big Fight', has
never come around to unequivocally condemning American violence, which
has reduced all of Afghanistan to unlivable terrain for several decades
to come.

Before America's Afghan War, we were concerned about the violence which
has become endemic in our state. The violence of our government occurs
with impeccable regularity, as if to enhance our tolerance of it. The
violence of the Peoples' War Group, which till recently lacked a Marxist
or _Maoist_ perspective, was quasi-feudal, by contrast. The PWG seemed to
be clearing the ground for a proper revolution; they were busy
eliminating competitors, informers and covert operators from the field.
Vendettas against the state for killing their men and women in staged
encounters occupied most of their revolutionary time. In a vendetta,
between the plan and the execution there may be many a slip. To offset
such lapses, they targeted public places like rural railway stations,
telephone exchanges and local government buildings. This form of protest
was a hangover from our freedom struggle, for which we have not yet
found a substitute. After three decades of sporadic violence they
finally realised that they had still not identified a genuine class
enemy! After globalisation, class enemies no longer come incognito. They
are all over us in the form of multinational corporations. People and
groups other than revolutionaries took them on. It was they who forced
Kentucky Fried Chicken to hide behind the protection of security guards.
I do not recollect anyone being called to account for not barring the
entry of this prime symbol of the American way of life into our culture.

On 22 October 2001, the Telugu daily, Vaartha, under a screaming banner
headline, informed everybody with clinical detachment about the bombing
of civilian populations in Afghanistan. In the space left in the margin
of the first page was a small headline followed by the news that the
Peoples' War Group had used an improvised bomb to bring down partially
the Coca-Cola factory located near Mangalagiri in Guntur district. I
felt that at last the Andhra revolutionaries had learnt to identify
their class enemies. At about the same time my telephone rang. The call
was from the Secunderabad representative of a major TV channel. I was to
hold a long-distance discussion with their Delhi correspondent on the
blowing up of the Coca-Cola factory. I felt that I had been called upon
to show cause! I do not know why I or any other human rights activist
should offer explanations for the explosions or killings of the PWG. Why
the ridiculous presumption that those who protest against the unlawful
and brutal actions of the state against political dissenters of whatever
hue, even terrorists, are themselves supporters of terrorists? The logic
appears to be: If you are in politics you must join electoral politics
or join ranks with the terrorist. Either it is black or white; no
intermediate shades are allowed. A very fascist formula, this!

This logic has been accorded a global status by U.S. President George
Bush, who declared after 11 September: 'Those who are not with us are
with the terrorists.' This principle is naturally acceptable to all the
states in the world, because it is on this principle that they repress
their own people on a large scale with impunity.

The day-and-night violence by the U.S. on Afghanistan, on a scale and
magnitude never witnessed before in history, has legitimised violence as
a way of resolving issues and settling disputes. What was given to Kofi
Annan and the U.N. was not the Nobel prize for peace, but terminal
benefits for services rendered. Violence has truly become a non-issue.

I can understand the TV stations being concerned by the destruction of
the Coca-Cola factory. Perhaps this company is their highest revenue
earner. This incident has not produced any noticeable response
otherwise, for why should anybody worry about what happens to Coca-Cola
or any other multinational? Have these corporations ever cared about
what they are doing to the societies where they operate?

To take just one instance, look at what they have done to the game of
cricket. Earlier, there was a particular season in which it was played,
but now it is played all the year round, night and day and even when
there is a power outage. It was known as a gentleman's game and, by and
large, those who took to this game behaved like gentlemen. A third
umpire was not even dreamt of. The game had only two umpires and their
decisions were accepted without any misbehaviour, either from the
batsmen or the bowlers. Cricket was once a synonym for fairness. Within
a few years, however, the game and its players have been converted into
advertising vehicles for the multinations' products. Today's cricketers
dress themselves in multi-coloured outfits befitting buffoons in a
circus. On account of the affluence this game brings, the
competitiveness between the players, in the same or different teams,
turns very aggressive, and we hear them swear and snarl at each other.
The advertising revenues they earn binds them into complete
acquiescence. This is violence, too, more destructive and enduring than
physical violence.
