# Veerappan and the Rule of Law

Veerappan and the Kannada film actor Raj Kumar must by now have learned
to live together. Perhaps they have exchanged notes about their lives,
discovering the similarities in their humble beginnings and the
difficult periods they went through on their respective roads to
prosperity and fame. One became an outlaw, lord of the forests spanning
the border between the states of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. The other
attained prosperity and fame by enacting make-believe worlds for popular
consumption and of course for consideration. If the biographer of
Veerappan is to be believed, his life provides an excellent theme for a
film where Rajkumar plays the role of Veerappan. Faced with a story like
Veerappan's, the analytically inclined talk about Robin Hood and offer a
leftish explanation about circumstances and an exploitative society.
However, people like Veerappan, though they operate outside the legal
framework, are very much a part of the exploitative order. People who
had nothing to complain about so long as the government connived at
their flouting the law and its institutions. Veerappan can never argue
for the overthrow of the system, for the latter provided him the space
for his phenomenal rise. If you interview him he will tell you that we
should not vote for the corrupt and that we must opt for clean politics.
He will even give you acceptable reasons for some of the crimes he has
committed. After all that has been said and written about him, you will
not grudge this subaltern his rise to fortune and fame. His story shows
that for a few this system permits mobility from the log cabin to the
White House, from a street vendor to a capitalist controlling
governments, from a mere rowdy to a don.

Both in this country and in the U.S. there is a distinguished tradition
of admiration for scoundrels like Veerappan. All of them were great
supporters of democracy and the status quo. Joan Robinson, in Freedom
and Necessity, quotes from an interview with Al Capone.[^275] When the
interviewer made sympathetic references to his own harsh life growing up
in the slums of Brooklyn, Capone bristled. 'Listen,' he said, 'don't get
an idea that I am one of those goddam radicals. Don't get the idea I am
knocking the American system.' As though an invisible chairman had
called upon him for a few words, he broke into an oration upon the
theme. He praised freedom, enterprise and the pioneers. He spoke of 'our
heritage'. He referred with contemptuous disgust to socialism and
anarchism. 'My rackets,' he repeated several times, 'are strictly run on
American lines, and they are going to stay that way.' 'This American
system of ours, he stated, call it Americanism, call it capitalism, call
it what you like, gives to every one of us a great opportunity if we
only seize it with both hands and make the most of it.'

The system operating in this country gives predators great
opportunities. Veerappan seized these like Capone in order to emerge as
a political leader and a totally free man. To this end he kidnapped a
very proper person, a darling of the state of Karnataka. The necessary
orchestrations have already been made, including political demands, the
release of a biography, and sympathetic articles in the press. He has
not yet made the grant of amnesty a condition for the release of Raj
Kumar. The demands made so far appear trivial and totally uninformed.
The obvious effort of his intermediary is to help himself and his
friends and to provide a political image to Veerappan, who expects a
'golden handshake' from his previous business. But the abduction, the
demands and the orchestration have alerted the actor's family and
friends, and their moves are likely to jeopardise the life of Raj Kumar,
while their anger against Veerappan is likely to be as blind and brutal
as Veerappan's deeds.

Look at the consequences of our failure to secure the release of Raj
Kumar. Veerappan is a Tamil and language riots are not new to Karnataka.
If the attempts fail, attacks on Tamils cannot be ruled out. There is a
sizeable community of Tamils settled in Karnataka; they should not be
made to pay for the deeds of a corrupt set-up which allowed Veerappan to
grow to his unmanageable size, nor should they pay for his deeds of
brutality.

Setting him free after all his plunder and 134 alleged murders is
unthinkable. Of those murdered, 34 were policemen. One police officer's
parent has gone to court, stalling the release from jail of the
fifty-plus prisoners demanded by Veerappan. His grief and anger cannot
be questioned. The question is, who should be punished? These are the
facts of the case against Veerappan:

In the year 1992, two crimes were registered at the Ramapuram police
station. The next year a further two crimes were registered by the M.M.
Hills police. Against these four crimes, four cases were registered by
the designated court, then four charge-sheets were filed between 28
November 1997 and 28 March 1998, and charges were framed thereafter. A
total of 143 persons have been arraigned as accused; among these, 103
persons are Veerappan and his gang. 46 members of this gang have died in
encounters and skirmishes with the police; another 24 are said to be on
the run; and charges against 22 have been dropped. Among those in prison
in connection with Veerappan are villagers from the areas where his gang
operates, numbering around 121. On a review and following the directions
given by the Supreme Court in Shaheen Welfare Association,[^276]
around 70 persons were released on bail. These facts were before the
Karnataka High Court when writ petitions were filed to quash TADA
charges. These writ petitions were filed at the behest of PUCL and
Peoples Watch, an NGO from Madurai. These petitions were dismissed on 11
February 2000. We decided to proceed with the trial.

I do not think that in examining these cases there is any place for
indignation, judicial or righteous. The Chief Minister of Karnataka, a
latecomer on the scene, cannot be blamed for the growth of Veerappan's
gang or the kidnap. The peremptory dressing down he got from the Supreme
Court was unfortunate. We are in the midst of an enveloping ineptitude,
and one cannot assert that a particular institution has not been
functioning well.

The crime was registered in 1992, but it did not proceed to trial until
the filing of the forty writ petitions on 11 October 1999. TADA itself
came into force in 1987 for the second time. Thereafter it has undergone
four extensions of two years each. The explanation given to the Supreme
Court was that the trial was postponed for want of court premises, which
were not secured till 23 October 1999. The act mandates speedy trial,
but the court building was secured four years after the expiry of the
act and twelve years after it was passed originally. Veerappan and his
gang were not apprehended at all over these years, and the 121 arrested
villagers had been forgotten. And what was their crime? That they were
all acting at the bidding of Veerappan's gang, for which he was
providing them with a livelihood. Living under fear and duress, can
anybody behave otherwise?

When PUCL and Peoples Watch took up these matters, they were arguing for
quashing of the TADA charges alone, for we had a principled objection
against TADA. Even now we hold the same view. If two governments can be
browbeaten by this abduction, should there be any further evidence to
convince us that the 121 villagers were just as frightened of
Veerappan's Wrath? These 121 villagers, including the fifty in prison,
are not accused of any overt acts against the victims of Veerappan.
Should they be harassed by continuing these proceedings?

Abductions on political grounds, we know, are of a different order. An
ordinary criminal like Veerappan, by a simple act of abduction, is
asking the authorities to pay minimum wages, to grant bail to prisoners
who have been detained for long periods without trial, not to use
preventive detention as a substitute for punitive detention, and to
settle river disputes equitably and without rancour. How and why did
abduction become a substitute for the rule of law? Should not the court
work in tandem with the government in such situations and devise ways
and means of easing tensions and provide guidelines for an equitable
resolution of such issues without jettisoning the rule of law and our
constitutional objectives?



[^275]:
Joan Robinson, Freedom and Necessity, Unwin Hyman, 1970.

[^276]:
Shaheen Welfare Association v. Union of India, AIR 1996 SC 2957.
