# The Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee

Civil liberties movements invariably come into existence along with the
rise of radical political movements. Governments that maintain an
exploitative order tend to become violent the moment political movements
threatening it gain a foothold. In the late 1960s the country was in the
grip of a crisis from which we have not yet got out. War with China led
to a diversion of funds to defence at the cost of development. Prime
Minister Nehru, the biggest draw in Indian politics since independence,
died in 1964. There was a steep fall in food production from 88 million
tons in 1964--65 to 74 million tons in 1965--66. This combined with
increasing inflation and rising unemployment created a sense of
insecurity among the people. But under these very conditions, it was the
upper classes who gained effective control over available resources. The
Mahalanobis Committee observed in 1964 that India's planned economy had
encouraged the concentration of economic power by facilitating the
growth of big business. The benefits of planned investment and enhanced
government expenditure had increasingly flowed to the upper classes.
When the people organised themselves, it posed a threat to the security
of the state. Even democratic processes were viewed as threats and all
norms looked like obstacles.

The only way to abolish norms is to consolidate power. Populism
embellishes totalitarian politics and creates an illusion. Mrs. Gandhi
had arrived at this stage by 1969. Suddenly, the Directive Principles of
the Constitution, which had been neglected by politicians and the
justice system alike, became her favourite. This period saw the birth of
the movement started by Jayaprakash Narayan (JP), and also the _Naxalbari_
movement. In 1974, JP founded the Peoples Union for Civil Liberties and
Democratic Rights.

By 1969 the Srikakulam movement had begun in Andhra Pradesh. There were
agitations for a separate state of Telangana. The old Suppression of
Disturbances Act, 1947, passed by the province of Madras, had been
carried over in 1967 to the state of A.P. created from the unified
province. The entire tribal area from Srikakulam to Adilabad was
notified under this act as a 'disturbed area'. Once an area has been so
notified, any officer above the rank of Sub-Inspector can shoot to kill
if he deems it necessary. It was in these notified areas that encounters
began to be staged. A few thousand tribals were imprisoned in the
initial stages.

As repression and violence by the state became brazen, protest movements
started. One early organisation was the Defence Committee set up by the
advocates of Hyderabad. Among the founders was Bhakti Bushan Mondal, a
former minister from West Bengal and representative of the Forward Bloc
and the late Ravi Subba Rao, an advocate of the Andhra Pradesh High
Court. I was elected convenor. This organisation was set up for the
defence of _Naxalites_ arrested in staged encounters. Instead of searching
for political solutions to the issues raised by the _Naxalite_ movement,
the entire matter was treated as a law-and-order problem and handed over
to the police. In a sense, a state of emergency had been declared in
Andhra by 1969, while the 1970s saw atrocities against the rural poor
increase. Several hundred tribal villages were set on fire. It was at
this time, in 1973, when repression in Andhra was at a peak, that a few
writers, poets and teachers got together and set up the A.P. Civil
Liberties Committee (APCLC). The famous Telugu poet Sri Sri was its
first president.

The organisation was targeted during the national Emergency. Many of its
members, including its first secretary, P. Venkateswarlu, were arrested.
After the Emergency I became the organisation's second president and
continued in this post for 15 long years before I retired. After 1980
the organisation was again singled out for violent treatment by the
state. When N.T. Rama Rao first became chief minister in 1983 there was
some respite, but soon after he returned to power in 1984 (which period
he called the restoration of democracy), he gave full power to the
police. It was during his tenure that the first civil liberties activist
was killed. Dr. A. Ramanathan, a fine person and a paediatrician, was
shot dead by the police in broad daylight on 3 September 1985 while he
was working in his clinic. There has never been any enquiry. On 7
November 1986 our senior executive committee member, Japa Laxma Reddi,
was shot dead by the police in Karimnagar. In this case too there has
been no enquiry. Even earlier, on 13 January 1985, Gopi Rajanna, a young
advocate and convenor of the Karimnagar cell of the APCLC, was shot dead
by youth belonging to the right-wing ABVP party for daring to defend
alleged Naxalities in that area. The secretary of the organisation, Dr.
K. Balagopal, was arrested repeatedly and held in both legal and illegal
custody. At one time the police hired goons to maul him and once he was
kidnapped by the police themselves from Khammam. Half of the APCLC's
executive committee was incarcerated on false charges during Rama Rao's
chief ministership. In October 1987, plainclothes policemen came with
hooligans and assaulted members of the executive gathered at my house.
On 7 December 1991, Narra Prabhakar Reddy, a 32-year old advocate
practicing in Warangal, was shot dead by the police. He was the
secretary of the Warangal Bar Association and _sarpanch_ of his village in
Jangaon. His village had been judged the best twice. His only crime was
that he had systematically arranged for the release of arrested
_Naxalites_ on bail.

Despite their violent animosity towards us, when some of their top
bureaucrats were kidnapped by _Naxalites_ in December 1987, the state
asked the APCLC to intervene and secure their release. This type of
intervention was a first for human rights organisations in this country.
Afterwards, the APCLC felt that no radical political movement should
reproduce state terror and that it is important for any revolutionary
movement to build up a human rights tradition if it is to avoid
distortions in a postrevolutionary society. But there is still a debate
on the theoretical formulation of this point. The APCLC has intervened
effectively in other kidnaps, but I as the president have received
anonymous communications that I am likely to be eliminated by the
police.

The APCLC is committed to fighting against gross violations of human
rights. It has also been taking up the issues of hunger and drought,
starvation deaths and the environment, violence against women and
attacks on _Dalits_. However, the greatest focus has always been on staged
encounters and custodial deaths. The organisation has a large membership
that is unmindful of the grave risk involved in working for human rights
and democracy in this country.
