# Koyyuru: Reflections on a Kidnap

> The government will not re-establish respect for the law without
> giving the law some claim to respect. It cannot do that if it neglects
> one feature that distinguishes law from ordered brutality. If the
> government does not take rights seriously, then it does not take the
> law seriously either.
>
> \
>
> Ronald Dworkin, Taking Rights Seriously

Koyyuru and the area around it was where Alluri Seetharamaraju organised
the Pithuri revolt against the British. He was arrested while bathing in
the tank in the village of Mampa, a few kilometers from Koyyuru. He was
brought to Rajendrapalem, a hamlet of Koyyuru, tied to a tree and shot
dead. Encounters are a colonial tradition in this area. The officer who
performed this gallant act was Major Goodal. Seetharamaraju's body was
brought by the British to K.D. Peta, a few kilometers down the road to
Narsipatnam from Koyyuru, where it was cremated. Our police follow this
tradition scrupulously. Seetharamaraju was barely 27 when he was killed
in 1984. This is still the average lifespan of revolutionaries,
including _Naxalites_. Arjun Rao, a civil servant of our time, while
serving in various capacities in the area, initiated steps to erect
memorials at the places where Seetharamaraju was caught, shot and
cremated.

Balaraju was a good _adivasi_ leader and MLA, one who consistently worked
for the uplift of Andhra's tribals, trying hard to implement legislation
protecting them from the exploitation by plains people that had caused
them to revolt repeatedly. He had the support of the tribals in and
around Koyyuru. The Peoples' War Group kidnapped him along with
Srinivasulu, a project officer, and four employees of the Girijan
Cooperative in order to secure the release of two _Naxalites_, Ramanna,
lodged in the Secunderabad jail, and Kranti Ranadev from the Warangal
jail. Many had felt aggrieved that the reservations so prevalent
elsewhere did not extend to abductions. But for the politics of the
Peoples' War Group, these constitutional niceties were
irrelevant.[^277]

Abducting persons unconnected with the specific issue in contention,
whether by the police or the _Naxalites_, can scarcely be condoned. In
terms of political practice there is no difference between the two. Yet
there is no public outcry when the police resort to illegal detention
and custody, because those detained are always the poor and
disinherited. The A.P. government's utter disregard for constitutional
values and its failure to perform its fundamental obligations have been
largely responsible for the spread of the _Naxalite_, _Dalit_ and
anti-liquor movements in the state. The Nazi propagandist Goebbels said,
'The state must have the courage to break its own laws.' The Indian
state has appropriated this dictum in dealing ruthlessly with the
various movements that have confronted it.

I and other human rights activists knew the capacity of the government
to inflict large-scale rights violations in the process of securing the
release of legislator Balaraju and the others. Without the support of
the government, however, effective intervention would not be possible.
This difficulty was resolved when a senior bureaucrat called Dayachari
approached us with an urgent request to help. We proceeded to
Narsipatnam on 4 February 1993, where we met Arjun Rao, the same who had
resurrected the memory of Seetharamaraju and the special officer
authorised to negotiate the exchange.

It took three days before we could meet the leaders of the Peoples' War
Group. The prisoners Ramanna and Ranadev said they wanted to leave the
movement and lead normal lives. The PWG then stopped pressing for the
release of Ramanna but suspected that Ranadev had disavowed them under
duress. They wanted his statement verified by an independent person. We
thought of Kaloji Narayan Rao, someone with an impeccable reputation.
But Ranadev did not cooperate and further contact with the PWG became
impossible because the police had begun roughing up the _adivasis_. On 11
February only four of the six hostages were set free near K.D. Peta. We
waited till the 17th before returning to Hyderabad. Before leaving we
appealed to the PWG to release Balaraju and Chinnam Raju without waiting
for Kranti Ranadev, and we offered to return to Koyyuru for further
negotiations.

The government had earlier agreed in principle to secure bail and
release Ranadev to join his comrades if the hostages were released. To
lend strength to this assurance they took steps to secure bail in the
cases pending against him in Warangal and Khammam, but the cases in
Maharashtra remained unattended. This was the stage at which the four
hostages were set free. In a letter addressed to Arjun Rao sent with
them, the PWG reiterated their earlier demand that Ranadev should be
brought to Narsipatnam. Arjun Rao and I felt that Vizag prison would be
better and accordingly suggested shifting Ranadev to the Vizag central
prison. While in Hyderabad we were in constant touch with Arjun Rao and
Dayachari, discussing ways and means of removing the impediments to
Ranadev's release. While the chief minister agreed in principle to
release Ranadev, he wanted the two hostages to be released first. For
the chief minister this became a matter of prestige, while the PWG
insisted on simultaneous release because they did not trust the
government. While Arjun Rao convinced the chief minister of the wisdom
of resolving the issue without force, Mysoora Reddy, the home minister,
was talking to the press about wiping out the _Naxalites_, and announcing
that the government would not yield an inch, much to the annoyance of
the people at Narsipatnam, Koyyuru and other surrounding areas.

Politically, Chief Minister Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy was not in as bad a fix
as N.T. Rama Rao during the earlier kidnap of senior bureaucrats from
near Gurthedu in 1987. There was no danger of impending presidential
rule. N.T. Rama Rao had acted speedily to ensure the continued rule of
his party in the state; concern for the safety of the kidnapped officers
was secondary. In this he had the support of the state's top civil
servants and police officials, though for different reasons. By
contrast, Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy faced only internal opposition within his
party, the Congress (I). Some of these dissidents, led by Dronamaraju
Satyanarayana K. Ramakrishna and other Congress legislators of that
area, organised protest demonstration in Narsipatnam, preempting the use
of force there, and offered to resign their seats. But the chief
minister countered by forwarding their resignations to the speaker.

Still, Member of Parliament Ramakrishna and the other legislators, and
even Balaraju's wife, Radha, managed to put the government under
enormous pressure. Wedded as we are to the adversarial system, we are
precedent-oriented not only in law but also in politics. The people in
Narsipatnam, including the Congress dissidents, cited Gurthedu and the
kidnap of Congress legislator Sudhir Kumar as instances where the
government had acted with lightning speed, in contrast to the dithering
in this case. The Gurthedu incident happened while the Telugu Desam
Party was in power, while Sudhir Kumar was abducted when the Congress
was in power. In the latter case the chief minister was N. Janardhan
Reddy. When Koyyuru happened, the Congress was still in power but the
chief minister was now Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy. Prisoners were exchanged in
both previous kidnaps. Ultimately, the PWG released Balaraju and
Chinnamraju on 21 March 1993. It was the ethic of the faction-riven
Rayalaseema area, namely 'keeping one's word', that prevented the
government from reneging on its assurances, and so Kranti Ranadev was
released a few days thereafter.

Arjun Rao and Dayachari played a commendable role in ensuring that the
issue did not end violently. They had utilised to the full the personal
relationship they had with Inspector General Subba Reddy of the police,
as he waited in readiness at Koyyuru with an armed force of considerable
strength. At Hyderabad they knew the personal secretary to the chief
minister. However, my experience at Narsipatnam illustrates how no
official, even one specially deputed, is allowed to take a decision on
the spot, and how within the bureaucratic set-up, civil administration
is subordinate to police administration.

With a few notable exceptions, our bureaucrtic apparatus suffers from
the total absence of a world-view. Their initial training only teaches
the bureaucrats to be elitist. As Marx points out in his Early Writings,
all people are neatly divided by them into two classes: the active ones
who administer, and those who are passively administered. Having
appropriated the business of administration to themselves, they confine
accountability to within the hierarchy: criticism can only be in the
descending order and accountability in the ascending order. Finding the
sorry state he _encountered_ when he entered service continuing that way
as he ages in the job, the bureaucrat concludes that the people
themselves are responsible for their condition. This rationalisation
provides the justification for switching from initial optimism to crass
materialism and for converting the purpose of the state into his private
purpose. If the latter coincides with the philosophy of his political
masters, he is in clover!

But the present conditions of distress will ensure that the existing
social order cannot continue in peace. Meanwhile, even an attempt to
operate insurgently within the existing system is looked upon as a
threat to the security of the state and put down ruthlessly. Because the
Constitution has been systematically set aside by our governments, there
is widespread violence to change the status quo. If the people organise
themselves to compel the state to enforce its own laws and the
Constitution, it is called rebellion, while it is downright treason if
anybody demands the strict observance, both procedural and substantive,
of criminal law. As for the media, their approach is totally apolitical.
Working within the constitutional set-up, they hardly realise that the
Constitution is a political document which, to be at all useful, has to
play a transforming role. The problem is not the _Naxalite_ movement but
the exploitative state. The officers of the state rarely understand the
central role played by the bureaucracy in continuing our iniquitous
system.

Meanwhile, the police has been increasingly used to maintain existing
inequalities. It has slowly gained ascendancy over the civil
administration since independence. Today a district magistrate is a
nonentity for the police; the functions assigned to him under the
Criminal Procedure Code are of no consequence to the police. The entire
system of executive magistracy, entrusted with the statutory task of
enquiring into cases of unnatural deaths in custody, has been
subordinated to the task of preparing a preliminary report to hide the
capital crimes committed by the police. These are the enquiries flaunted
by all levels of the government as confirming that there has been no
violation of human rights. The government doggedly believes that a lie
that is repeated becomes the truth. The government, unable and unwilling
to deal with political dissent, treats movements like that of the
_Naxalites_ as law-and-order problems and hands them over to the police
establishment, leading to a hegemonic politicisation of the police
force. In particular, the language used by the police has broken the
conventions of administrative culture, in which subjective reactions are
supposed to be voiced with utmost restraint.

What is important is the emergence of this politics of vengeance as an
epitome of contemporary politics. Can there be a politics of this type
at all? How can regression be a principle of politics? Behind all the
kidnaps and violent destruction of property, there has always been a
demand for an enquiry into an encounter, a disappearance, an illegal
custody, etc. The response to a movement that resorts to violence after
very legitimate demands should not be the closure of all redressal
forums. It is true that the Peoples' War Group does not believe in the
Constitution, but the same is true of the police force also, and it is
the latter that has caused the escalation of violence in our society. I
and other rights activists have always been of the view that no
political movement working to overthrow an exploitative order has any
right to reproduce the brutalities practised by it. To use abductions
for political ends is counterproductive. It may at some point alienate
the very people for whom the _Naxalites_ have been waging an unremitting
struggle, undergoing severe privations and putting their lives at great
risk.

There has been a steady degeneration in governance, in the content of
our politics, even in the response of the public to atrocities and
injustice. All of us have been reduced to the position of spectators,
afraid even to take sides. Our responses are very often moulded by our
prejudices and our own politics, and the habits of thought such politics
inculcate in us. In a crisisridden society such as ours, it is not the
government alone that is in crisis; all of us are. That is why I think
we are confused about such important issues as violence on _Dalits_,
reservations in jobs, the necessity of a secular polity if social
transformation is to take place at all, and the necessity for promoting
a human rights tradition.

For human rights activists, Koyyuru and the earlier Gurthedu[^278]
raise issues regarding the concept of human rights itself: what is the
advisability of expanding the concept and thereby enlarging its field of
operation? What are its relations with radical and democratic movements?
What is its potential for transformation while working within the
institutions available in a democratic set-up? Finally, should a human
rights movement merely confine itself to maintaining a crime audit of
the state?


[^277]:
The _Naxalite_ movement in Srikakulam commenced in the late 1960s,
forty-five years after the death of Seetharamaraju. Despite the
systematic physical liquidation of the _Naxalites_, the movement
continues even today: Nearly seventy years after Seetharamaraju, one
finds the same deprivation and poverty in the areas where he
organised his revolt.

[^278]:
The abduction of government officers in 1986 by _Naxalites_. Civil
liberties activists were requested by the state government of N.T.
Rama Rao to negotiate their release.
