# In the First Person

## Emergency

When a state of emergency was declared in June 1975, the people were
unprepared. A large number of arrests were made on the 25th of that
month. From midnight to 7 a.m. I received a series of phone calls from
those who had been taken to the Sultan Bazar police station in
Hyderabad. They included M.T. Khan, Cherabanda Raju and Partipati
Venkateswarlu, the secretary of the Defence Committee.[^279]

The next day I filed a writ petition on behalf of Venkateswarlu's wife,
challenging MISA and challenging the validity of the Emergency. This was
one of the first such cases to be filed in the country. It was a bizarre
scene in the courts; I found a police inspector there saying,
'Henceforth we will rule.' Venkateswarlu's petition, a writ of _habeas
corpus_, came up for hearing in the afternoon. During my submissions to
the court, I contended that I could see no grounds for the arrest of
Venkateswarlu, and that if there were any the public prosecutor should
be directed to produce both the order of arrest and the grounds.

Doing these political cases, especially during the Emergency, has made a
big difference to my life. It was important to participate politically
and operate insurgently; in order to preserve freedom and democracy, one
has to fight within the institution.

## On Personal Liberty and Privacy

I was warned that my phone had been tapped and that police were
recording everything. But I was not really worried. Later, when I was
working for the _Bhargava Commission_ after the Emergency, there was talk
that I would be attacked. Justice Muktadar phoned me and said to be
careful. The threats continued, but none of us talked about them. Now it
is all part of history, but at the time, I remember, Balagopal was
beaten up, as was Kodand. During an executive committee meeting at my
house, we heard that six men had been beaten. The police had come with a
bunch of hooligans and beaten them up. We used to get threatening
letters that said: 'We will burn you,' 'we will kill you,' and so on. We
never talked about all this, nor did we ever go to the press. We used to
go ahead with our work normally. A large number of people worked with me
and built tremendous credibility around themselves. It is very important
to build that credibility. It is important to make sure that your style
of living does not fracture your reputation. If that integrity is
maintained then you can work wonders with this institution. That has
been my personal experience. I strongly believe that the ends do not
justify the means, even in a struggle. This is a principle which Gandhi
and Tolstoy followed but which the Marxists dismissed. Ultimately, the
fundamental question is, what means do you adopt to secure what ends?
That was the big debate in those days; it must continue even today.

What I have learned during my professional life is that operating with
credibility and moral strength demands a particular style of life. And
it sets a limit to compromise. With the Emergency I thought: on
freedoms, no compromises; on human rights violations and personal
liberties, no compromises. When you base your career on these
principles, then the institutions and the persons operating them develop
tremendous faith in you. They are confident that you are right.

Gradually, several goals have been filtered out. And that has helped. I
once appeared for a hooligan called Kotha Das. He had been arrested
under a preventive detention law and taken away to Rajahmundry. He wrote
me a letter from jail saying, 'All the convicts say, "Go to our sir, he
will pull you out of this." \' My assistants had instructions: if
anybody wrote me from jail, they were to prepare a petition and inform
me, so that I could go and argue it. This fellow had already filed a
writ of _habeas corpus_, which had been dismissed. I looked up the law and
decided that we could argue the case. It came up and the moment I got up
to speak, Justice Kuppuswamy asked, 'Are you appearing in this case, Mr.
Kannabiran?' I quipped that perhaps I was appearing for the future chief
minister of the state. By contrast, I could never bring myself to appear
in excise cases, although I knew all the excise contractors personally.
An assistant who I had put in charge of the entire Secunderabad
conspiracy case, Prakash, his family, his family circles, and his
friends, all came to me and begged me to take up excise matters. I
always refused, because these contractors were adulterating toddy and
the poor people who drank it got killed. They went to another lawyer,
who built two houses within a year. So there are choices all along:
should you judge the values involved, do you take everything that comes
your way, or do you take up only certain cases.

For human rights lawyers and activists to be really successful, the
first struggle is to establish credibility, and just as importantly, not
to become a pawn of radical or militant groups. You should always be in
a position to maintain your independence. You can appear for radicals,
but if you identify with them there will be problems aplenty. This
independent attitude has enabled me to intervene effectively. If I had
been one of them, I could not have made many of the attempts I did. I
went into my cases fully confident that they respected me and would
listen to me if I appealed to reason. This is not possible if you are
linked to a party. You may like their politics even if you do not like
their methods. You are not really concerned with their politics, nor are
you going to judge it. You just keep your distance. Do your legal work
on their behalf firmly and steadfastly; this will pay rich dividends. It
is tempting to be part of them or be seen that way, because you want to
be popular. It is a heady feeling, being associated with militant
groups; it gives you a taste of glamour and power. It is difficult to
stay away from that, but the price of joining them will ultimately be
very high.

I remember when Jeevan Kumar was arrested by Superintendent of Police
D.T. Naik and held in custody overnight. Naik sent for Kumar's wife and
told her, 'I can make you a widow in a moment.' This is the culture of
our police and characteristic of their brutality. I called Delhi and
couldn't get anybody. Finally, I managed to get Unnikrishnan of the
Congress and talked to him. He phoned the home secretary, who called
Naik and said, 'Release that man, nothing should happen to him.' Then
Unnikrishnan called me and told me it was alright

In another instance, when I got information of Pradeep's arrest, I
immediately faxed a message to the chief minister and also to the
collector of Warangal. The SP who had arrested Pradeep asked him,
'Suppose your daughter reads in a newspaper tomorrow that you have been
killed in an encounter, how would she feel?' It is this violent attitude
that must be curbed.

I see violent attacks on personal liberty in the context of
people --- women, _Dalits_, tribals and others --- protesting for their
rights. Unless political liberty is maintained, no movement can
progress; it can even get suppressed right at the start. So unless you
have personal liberty, the right to association, to assembly and to free
speech all become meaningless, without effect. I foresaw that, sooner or
later, it would become very important for the state to suppress these
movements. When Indira Gandhi said that the Constitution's directive
principles should take precedence over personal liberties and
fundamental freedoms, I was the first person to write that for directive
principles of state policy to be enforced, the citizens should have the
right to organise and enforce them if the state refuses to do so. In
India at least, the conviction has always been that it is the business
of the state to bring about these things; and since they are not legally
enforceable, that they cannot be enforced at all. I was among the first
to insist that personal liberty, that is, the freedom of speech, the
freedom of expression and the freedom of association, are the three
basic rights necessary to compel the government to fulfil its
obligations. In the Srikakulam and Parvatipuram conspiracy cases, where
the offence was sedition, I argued that to organise a party to
politically enforce what is contained in the Constitution's chapter on
directive principles of state policy, when the government has not
performed these constitutional obligations, and to call for the
overthrow of such a government, cannot amount to sedition.

On violence, there was a debate as to which is primary and which
secondary. We felt that all aspects of violence have to be taken into
account. The original APCLC bylaws said that as a landlord is equal to a
state, a landlord's exploitation becomes a civil liberties issue. Then,
as definitions of violence expanded, we began to take into account the
rise of various movements. As far as I am concerned, the primary issue
is human life, that it should not be crushed as is happening now. When
people ask why I keep talking about encounter killings, I answer that
they are the foulest of human rights violations. They have to stop. It
is not possible for me to ignore them and take on other matters. I do
not enter new areas.

## The Niyogi Assassination {#37_in-the-first-person.xhtml#heading-3}

The murder of Shankar Guha Niyogi by his employers was one case that
actually got investigated. The trial court convicted Niyogi's boss and
sentenced to him to life, while the contract killer, Malla, was
sentenced to death. Nandita Haksar sat through the entire trial to see
that it was not unnecessarily disrupted or postponed, as that may lead
to a plea for acquittal. Even the CBI played a good role by securing the
service of a good prosecutor and seeing to it that witnesses were
produced. Strangely, the witnesses repeated what they had told the
police, describing the events leading up to the murder and the events
after the murder. All of this led to convictions and sentences. In the
whole of our trade union history this was perhaps the only case where an
employer was sentenced to life. I could hardly believe it.

I had known Shankar Guha Niyogi for long. He was a young man when I
first met him in Delhi. I think this was when he had come to present a
memorandum to the authorities that there was an attempt to kill him. The
president would not look at the matter and the government ignored the
complaint. Niyogi told me he wanted me to come and settle down in
Chattisgarh and stand for Parliament from there. I just laughed but he
was quite serious: 'It is your place. You should stand for Parliament
and look after your constituency.'

He was the only trade union leader who thought of campaigning for the
unorganised sector. And he did it very successfully. He had a hold on
the workers because of his style of life: he was very open and never did
anything underhand. He also tried to instil a sort of workers' ethic.
Like one fine morning, he called the workers and they assembled in the
thousands. He made them all swear that they would not drink again. The
women were given the authority to levy penalties on their husbands. It
was a fascinating experiment that worked. When the workers stopped
drinking the excise contractors lost business heavily. Niyogi was
arrested under the National Security Act and taken under preventive
detention. Then Anil Sadgopal and others went to Jabalpur to file writ
petitions.

Niyogi organised the unorganised workers comprehensively and compelled
the employers to pay minimum wages. The Contract Labour Abolition Act is
supposed to have put an end to contract labour, but in reality promotes
it. Instead of taking steps to abolish contract labour gradually, the
government has chosen to regulate it. There was tremendous abuse of the
act's provisions at that time in Chattisgarh, Bhilai and all over the
country. The judgments of the Supreme Court did not really help to
interpret these provisions, which supported the employers although the
rhetoric was in favour of the employees.

Niyogi was shot through a window by one Paltan Malla, but there was
clear evidence of a conspiracy. As noted, the case ended in a
conviction, which was appealed to the Jabalpur High Court. There the
counsel for the employer was a well-known lawyer, an old fox called
Rajinder Singh. He was a big shot in Madhya Pradesh, so all lawyers were
expected to go visit with him. This is a problem with lawyering; one is
not a free individual. If one accepts a brief for the working class it
is just not on to go talk to the management's lawyers. You may joke with
them outside the courthouse but you cannot go and have a drink with
them. The public prosecutor, Tulsi, was found spending most of his time
with the defense counsel. Rajinder Singh practised in the Supreme Court,
as did Tulsi. So Niyogi's people said they wanted their own lawyer, to
please appoint K.G. Kannabiran. Then the CBI got in touch with me and
Rajinder Sachar called me. A PUCL lawyer from Madras called Suresh
assisted me. From the beginning the bench, a corporate
lawyer-turned-judge called Dubey, was hostile. The moment I commenced my
argument, he asked how long I would take. When I replied that I'd take
more than a week, he said, 'Why one week? One or two days should be
sufficient.' That is what public prosecutors do. Knowing the judges,
they finish early, whether the case is going in their favour or against
them. Dubey was a bit stunned that so many people had come from
Chattisgarh and were waiting for me to commence my arguments. He said
suddenly: 'Turn towards them and argue in Hindi, so that the people you
have brought here appreciate what you say.' I told him curtly that I was
not in the habit of bringing an audience along and for his information,
these people belonged to Niyogi's trade union, who had come to watch our
performance. I told him that his remarks were not in good taste. He
realised that there were limits to his arrogance and apologised.

I argued the case threadbare for nearly two and a halfweeks. We were
staying in a guesthouse owned by the Methodists. We set ourselves up
there and borrowed a computer. We used to set out our arguments in the
evenings. The evidence was much stronger than in the Kehar Singh
conspiracy case. I mean the Indira Gandhi assassination case, where
Kehar Singh was convicted on slender imaginary evidence. I placed the
entire series of conspiracy cases before the judges, and told them that
for the past thirty years I'd been breaking conspiracy cases. But here
for the first time in my life, I had to establish a conspiracy, and I
believed I had not come across stronger evidence for it. So I took them
through the whole thing: how the killers went to Nepal to purchase arms,
the arms store they visited there and what they bought. I explained how
they had systematically implicated Niyogi in several cases by lying
about him, for instance that he was a CIA agent. Paltan Malla's flight
reinforced the idea of a conspiracy. There was also a letter from one of
the Moolchand brothers to the other indicating that the job had been
done and that Paltan Malla needed to be paid. But it is very easy to
accept or reject conspiracy evidence in law; it can be quite subjective.
Conspiracy is the only charge where hearsay evidence is permitted. In my
favour was the conduct of Chandrakant, Moolchand and Navinchand
throughout. They had not reacted well to the labour disputes raised by
Niyogi and refused to attend any conciliation proceedings. They had
obtained injunction orders against his strikes and implicated him in
several criminal cases, so he was kept busy running around securing bail
for himself. That is how the criminal justice system is used by these
scoundrels; almost all employers behave like this. I needed a 'neutral'
judge, but I was saddled with an employer who had become a judge. I told
him I had done trade union work for almost twenty-five years and always
appeared for the workers. 'Oh, so did I, but I was appearing for the
employers,' he replied from the bench. If the judge is a good fellow,
nothing bad happens, but I had to insist that the trade union leaders
should be present in the court.

## Abductions

By 1986--87 the PWG had started kidnapping people. Malhar Rao was
kidnapped from Karimnagar. After he'd been gone three days, someone from
his family wrote me a letter asking me to intervene. Malhar Rao had been
very supportive of the PWG when they were fighting against atrocities
such as illegal arrests and staged encounters. Before I could do
anything, however, the police started a manhunt, and the PWG shot Malhar
Rao and threw out his body. That is how their first kidnap ended, but
their abductions only became more frequent, although they released a
number of people in response to appeals in the press. A mandal president
was kidnapped from somewhere near Bhongir or Jangaon, and soon after, as
a retaliation, Balagopal was kidnapped by the police. He was released
only because of tremendous public pressure from all over the country.
And then, I think it was in December 1987, there was a major kidnap of
three or four IAS officers and their entire entourage. They were
returning after visiting tribal areas. The IAS officers, important
people, were taken to a forest, while some seventeen people were left in
Gurthedu and instructed not to leave. At about 1.30 a.m. that night,
Yugandhar rang me up and said, 'Sankaran has been kidnapped, what should
I do?' I told him, 'If you are issuing a statement please add my name to
it, that's all.' He called again soon after and insisted I do something.
'What do you think I can do?' I asked. 'I can't really go into the
forest in search of Sankaran or try and meet the PWG and talk to them.
Because most likely I'll be shot. I cannot intervene as a mere citizen.
They will simply kill me and claim I was killed in the crossfire. So I
should be authorised by the government to go and hold talks with them
and try to secure the release of the officers.' Chief Minister N.T. Rama
Rao was not willing to give me an authorisation letter. He relented
after I told him that all his top bureaucrats wanted something done to
save their colleague Sankaran.

Armed with his letter and somewhat satisfied that the government would
not harm me, I traveled to Rajahmundry. There at the station I met a
police officer for the first time. As a matter of principle, I refuse to
interact with the police except on the witness stand. From Rajahmundry
we went to Rampachodavaram, along with seven prisoners who were to be
exchanged for the IAS officers. After receiving an assurance that there
would be no double-cross, I talked to the prisoners, who were all young
and worried that I was with the police. It took a while to convince them
that I was not.

After waiting till very late that night, we still had no word from the
kidnappers, so we decided to go ahead. Yugandhar and I got into a jeep
I'd arranged, but they put a policeman in it without telling us. The
prisoners spotted him right away, so I made him get off and we went
ahead, after I'd made the police take off the prisoners' chains and
shackles.

We reached Gurthedu around 11 p.m. Suddenly, a PWG youth appeared and
said we would have to proceed on foot into the forest. I left Yugandhar
behind and took the prisoners with me. After walking some forty-five
minutes, we reached a culvert and they were all there. The prisoners
were handed over and Sankaran and the other officers were released.
After we got back to the car Sankaran wanted to leave right away, but
the prisoners had told me to give them some time to disappear into the
forest or they would be shot. I had agreed, so I took the IAS officers
to the guesthouse and suggested that we eat before returning. Sankaran
was not hungry, but I said, 'Sorry, I'm a diabetic, so I'll have to
eat.' So everybody get fed and we left after that.

Later on, I had a lot of explaining to do to my fellow rights activists
as to why I had intervened to help the government. Kodand asked me the
next morning if I would rescue a kidnapped police officer. I said I
might, depending on who was abducted. There was a heated debate and I
called for an executive committee to decide if I was answerable. If they
thought I had done the wrong thing, I would resign, I said. The
committee met in Khammam and debated the issue from 8 in the morning to
8 in the evening. I got scalped, but I stuck to one point: 'Look here,'
I said, 'I am the president. I am available and I am acceptable. People
call me in crisis situations and ask me to intervene. Should I call for
a state executive each time? If something were to go wrong in the time
it takes to call a meeting, who will be responsible?' Ultimately, they
relented.

## The Concerned Citizens' Committee and Radical Politics

The Concerned Citizens' Committee was set up to involve a large
cross-section of the people in the peace process, on the premise that
one could not depend on the legislative parties alone. You have to
expand the debate so that people know what is happening. Those most
likely to benefit from the process must be involved. The trouble is that
people are either publicity shy or they are aggressive publicity
seekers. I have my politics. What I have been doing for the past thirty
years keeps coming through and I can't escape it. You may agree or
disagree. I do not criticise the Peoples' War Group because of a gut
feeling that if there is to be social transformation, youth like them
are the ones who will achieve it, as no one else has that kind of
commitment. The PWG commits mistakes, even blunders. Sometimes I am
disgusted by them. But then, I seldom allow the disgust to overwhelm me.
Because then I have to become inactive and fall back on our old
traditions like the Sundarakanda, Mahabharata, Bhagavata Gita and all
that. It is too late for me to go back to that now. When people turn
sixty they retire, turn to the scriptures, go out only to attend
religious gatherings and then return home. There are no problems or
tensions that way. But when you have chosen my kind of life, it is very
difficult to retire. I keep thinking of retiring, but I am not able to.
I do a lot of writing, which I never used to find the time for. I sit at
the computer and type up my articles using one finger. I do everything
the difficult way; that is my style.

\ 

(Based on an interview with Deepa Dhanraj in 2001)


[^279]:
The Defence Committee had been formed in 1972 to defend the
_Naxalites_ who had been arrested in large numbers, particularly from
the tribal areas. They had not been given bail, or the surety was so
steep that they could not afford it. Bhaktibhushan Mondal, a Forward
Bloc member from West Bengal, set up the Defence Committee.
