# The Effect of too much Substantive Law

The function of substantive law as the embodiment of the great ideals of
an independent judiciary has today become confused by an attempt to
apply it in detail to too many cases. Legal scholars have felt it their
peculiar duty to clarify the situation and to combat the skeptical
attitude toward the decisions of courts for which that confusion was
responsible. The American Law Institute is only part of this continuing
effort. Law reviews have been filled with attempts to clarify particular
fields. The usual method of attack, however, has been based on the
assumption that the confusion was the fault of an untutored judiciary
who had failed to reason and reconcile with that nicety which the
occasion required. Therefore, if the existing cases are only thoroughly
sifted, certain fundamental principles will finally appear which
everyone must recognize to be the principles on which appellate courts
and trial courts must operate until relieved by the legislature. The
discovery of these principles depends on the examination of what
appellate courts have said, without any particular regard to its
utility. The reason utility can not be a test is that substantive law
governs society outside the courts, and can only be changed by
legislative enactment (except, of course, that minor gaps can be filled
or new principles discovered).

The effect of this notion has been to make our system of judicial logic
grow like a snowball. Since so many of our rules are treated with the
attitude of substantive law, it has been difficult to talk about the
problems involved. An ordinary rule can be treated in the light of its
purpose and bent to meet a practical situation. A principle of
substantive law can also be modified, but not for practical
considerations. A greater principle must always be discovered. It is
inevitable therefore that if many of our problems are treated from the
point of view of substantive law, the bulk and complexity of the
principles of that science should increase beyond a point where any
artificial attempt to simplify by restatement is futile.

The only method of preventing the confusion of doctrines and precedents
is to treat them as ideals and general directions and to insulate them
from the cases which distort them into so many complicated and difficult
shapes. This seems paradoxical, yet it is based on the obvious
proposition that out of ten selected cases a legal scholar can build a
more coherent set of principles than he can out of ten thousand chosen
at random. We may illustrate it by calling attention to the success of
the English system. Here we find no skeptics undermining its prestige.
The supposed superiority of the English judges is heralded with great
humility wherever American lawyers gather. This does not mean that the
English judges are really superior, but that the conception of
substantive law is giving them a prestige which removes them from
individual criticism.

What has happened in England in the years following the Judicature Act
is not the sudden substitution of enlightened judges for bigoted ones,
but the insulation of the science of substantive law from the practical
problem of litigation. Instead of rigidly applying the substantive-law
doctrines through the principle of stare decisis, as many imagine, the
English have been devising practical escapes which separate principles
of substantive law from the actual cases which confuse them. This has
been done by transferring power to the trial courts and making it
difficult for appellate courts to make a written application of
doctrines to any case not fought with unusual determination and
disregard of expense. Thus substantive law exists at the top of the very
practical English system as an ideal exposition of a way of thought and
expression.

The ways in which this has been accomplished are interesting. First,
that vast mass of principles which are treated in America from a
substantive law point of view under the name of pleading and the various
steps before trial, are removed from the logical interpretation of
appellate courts by the simple device of interposing a master between
the litigant and the judge.[^26] In criminal cases the complicated
substantive science loses its importance because the court of criminal
appeal may treat cases individually and even increase the penalty,
instead of sitting solely as a court of error.[^27] Third, the heavy
imposition of costs makes appeal difficult. The attorney who thinks that
a principle of substantive law is wrongly applied by a lower court must
gamble very heavily on his judgment if he wants it reviewed.[^28]
Finally, only selected cases are collected in the reports which make up
the libraries of available citation. Six hundred and ninety-seven
volumes make up the relevant material for legal argument.[^29] We are
left to guess how many inconvenient cases from the point of view of
symmetry are buried under this important procedural device.[^30] What
is left after all these selective processes constitutes the substantive
law." Of course the cases are more easily reconciled because one hundred
cases can be reconciled in a much less complicated way than a thousand.
Thus, in England substantive law performs its function as a
philosophical guide divorced from actual cases. Power is transferred to
trial courts, and to judges who are not dignified by that peculiar name.
Judicial realism is dormant as realism always is when a creed is
fulfilling its function.[^31] The very practical matters which
determine litigation are taken care of in a practical way. Criticism of
decisions in the way American decisions are criticised in our law
reviews, does not exist.

It is this ability of the English to keep an ideal from too close
contact with reality which explains the prestige which they are able to
throw around their institutions. There is little positive evidence that
results in English courts are better than in ours, if we take into
consideration the intricate tasks which our courts are facing. The
evidence is only of a dignified process where the dividing line between
procedure and substantive law is so placed that it increases the area of
procedure and simplifies the judicial expression of principle.

In France the code stands as the ultimate symbol of substantive law. The
work of commentators who are more interested in principles than in
reconciling all the cases is given great weight. And finally, cases
which make these principles stand out are selected as precedents. The
gap between the code and its principles and the actual results is a
matter concealed in the double trial afforded by the lower courts, which
provides opportunity to treat the practical problems of litigation in a
practical way. Whatever the demerits of the French judicial system, at
least it has not become verbally cumbersome.

In this country the Supreme Court of the United States, in dealing with
constitutional problems, has, in recent years, been rapidly escaping
from the position of the humble instrument of constitutional doctrine,
and is being studied and recognized as a great judicial institution.
This has been accomplished by a change of attitude which permits us to
study the Court, operating through the language of the constitution,
instead of the constitution, with the Court appearing as an incidental
agency of enforcement. The skepticism of Mr. Justice Holmes and Mr.
Justice Brandeis, which recognizes, on the one hand, that doctrines do
not govern society, and, on the other, that they can be used wisely and
skilfully in governing the Court, is the kind of skepticism which
creates great institutions. In this they have been aided by a few
interpreters who have broken down the attitude which created the old
conventional course in constitutional law of fifteen years ago. As
peculiarly effective in accomplishing this I may cite Frankfurter and
Powell of Harvard, and Hamilton of Yale. Frankfurter by centering his
attention first on the problem to be solved,[^32] and then on the
Supreme Court as an institution, as in The Business of the Supreme
Court[^33] --- Powell by his penetrating wit, which is never used
merely for the purpose of being funny, and which illuminates like
flashes of lightning, as in his "An Imaginary Judicial Opinion"[^34]
--- and Hamilton, with his beautifully phrased constructive philosophy
in which the utility and future possibilities of the formulae of
constitutional law in the hands of an enlightened judge are
demonstrated, as in his "The Jurist's Art"[^35] --- have made the
Supreme Court stand out as a living instrument of government. Never has
the prestige of that Court been higher. No one is worrying about
restating constitutional law so that it will be simpler and easier for
that Court to apply it. These formulae seemed to have slipped into their
proper place, as necessary tools with which the Court must work, which
limit its activities, and aid in the expression of the attitude and
ideals which it brings to the solution of governmental problems. And the
confusion incident to a written expression of these doctrines in too
many cases is prevented by a discretionary appeal.

That the bundles of concepts and logical systems found in such fields as
contracts or torts, are not different, except in the area of their
application, from the formulae of constitutional law, does not seem to
be so clearly recognized.[^36] The constant attempt is to use them so
that they will control, not the processes of the court, but society in
general. They are being continually rephrased in various ways, so that
their fundamental elements can become more and more detailed and
certain. The English trick of isolating them from the general run of
litigation so that the effect of the attitude which they induce and the
general directions which they furnish will not be lost, is not realized.
An illustration may be useful here. If A tells B to report an accident,
giving only the facts and omitting so far as possible his conclusions,
this general direction will unquestionably affect the type of report.
But if A and B insist on writing books about the differences between
facts and conclusions examining in detail all the reports which have
been handed in for the past ten years, the direction will become
unintelligible. The rule will fail to function if it is analyzed in
every case. It will also fail to function if everything which has been
said about the difference between facts and conclusions, and not
expressly repudiated since the time of Lord Coke, must be preserved and
made relevant in the discussion of the report which B makes.[^37]





[]{#5_procedure-as-an-esca.xhtml}


# 3 {.chapter-number}

# PROCEDURE AS AN ESCAPE FROM SUBSTANTIVE LAW



Our judicial system, objectively examined, seems to be founded on so
many imponderable psychological factors that it can never be molded by a
direct attack upon its ideals without impairing its prestige. On the
other hand, its logical machinery is so elastic that it is capable of
tremendous changes if we understand the function which that logical
machinery performs. And because of the efforts of such men as Clark,
Pound, and Sunderland to make procedure a practical thing, followed by
the missionary propaganda found in such a periodical as the Journal of
the American Judicature Society, we find that today, by calling a body
of doctrine procedure, we can take an entirely different attitude toward
it from that which we take where we call it substantive law. Anyone can
say that procedure is not fundamental, that it has only to do with the
legal process, that it does not govern the outside world, that it always
needs reform, and finally that the reform may be accomplished by a
consideration of the problem involved, not by analyzing the fundamental
principles involved in doctrine.

The distinction between procedure and substantive law is one of the most
interesting consequences of our attitude toward an independent
judiciary. Substantive law is sacred and fundamental. It represents the
experience of the ages. On it is based the freedom of the individual. It
never needs reform because its fundamental verities can always be
discovered by logical analysis. Procedure, on the other hand, is
entirely practical. It always needs, not logic, but change in the light
of practical details. It is based on the experience of the ages also,
but age with it is senility, not wisdom. Yet, in spite of these
fundamental differences, no one has ever been able to formulate any test
which will distinguish between procedure and substantive law in any
particular case. Substantive law remains the "law" which we enforce,
procedure the practical rules by which we enforce it. We therefore
always "restate" substantive law in the light of its principles, and
"reform" procedure in the light of its practical problems.

The distinction is most useful in the judicial system, once we realize
that the difference is only in attitude, that any doctrine may be
treated as procedure and the problem discussed, or as substantive law
and the principle stated. The difference between procedure and
substantive law is a movable dividing line which may be placed wherever
an objective examination of our judicial institutions indicates is
necessary. Illustrations of this may be multiplied indefinitely. We will
confine ourselves to two. The problem of the distribution of legal
business between states may be considered from the substantive-law angle
under the topics of conflicts of laws, collateral attack, process,
presumptions in favor of a court of general jurisdiction, the
distinction between lack of jurisdiction and error in exercising it, the
distinction between domicil and mere residence, the concept of doing
business, express and implied consent to be sued, conceptions of local
and transitory actions, and so on indefinitely. Or it may be considered
from the procedural angle as a practical problem of determining the
place of trial in civil actions, as Mr. Roger Foster does in two
illuminating articles.[^38] From such a point of view the concepts and
theories disappear as irrelevant, without even doing violence to the
rule of stare decisis. It becomes apparent that if the court will only
talk about the problem it can easily escape the consequences of a
philosophy which is quite unfitted for its solution. Or if it can not,
in any given instance, we will at least know how to draft an act which
will treat the problem procedurally. Another example is found in the
method by which the law of sales determines where the loss of goods
destroyed by fire should fall as between buyer and seller. Obviously
what the doctrine is doing is determining in what cases the
determination of liability shall be left to a jury. Treated
substantively we find that it depends on whether "title" passed, which
in turn depends on the "intent" of the parties, which in turn may depend
on certain presumptions, from which the jury must find intent. The jury
is never permitted to find the real fact --- that the parties had no
actual intent at the time because they were thinking neither of "title"
nor of loss by fire. Treated procedurally we would talk not of intent
but of the distribution of power between the court and jury. Probably
the sales question is better solved by the apparent uniformity of the
doctrine where no better practical solution is offered,[^39] and
probably the place of trial can be better solved by a procedural
treatment because the doctrine includes so many dissimilar
things.[^40] We use the illustrations merely to show that there is no
doctrine of stare decisis, as opposed to stare dictum, which prevents us
from considering the practical utility of treating any problem from a
procedural point of view. Substantive law is canonized procedure.
Procedure is unfrocked substantive law.

In view of these existing legal attitudes, emphasis on the procedural
aspects, rather than on the underlying principles of any legal doctrine
can afford an effective method for immediately relieving courts and
attorneys of much of the burden arising from the myriad precedents in
this country. The law of negligence, for example, deals for the most
part with (1) the distribution of power between trial courts and juries
and (2) the ritual by which the jury is put in the proper frame of mind
to determine liability. The substantive-law solution is in part a
textbook, written through the medium of instructions, against a
background of conflicting results which certainly are not determined by
those instructions. Our formulae concerning non-prejudicial error, and
the jury's power over questions of \" fact" are sufficiently loose that
we may, if we wish, consider instructions in the light of their
purpose,[^41] and remove the cases which deal with them from cases
dealing with the question whether the jury is to be permitted to pass on
the question at all. Thus we may treat any part of our substantive law
from a procedural point of view. The selection need not be based on
history but on objective utility.

In determining the utility of doctrine it is important to recognize that
the function of the legal scholar as critic or reformer is different
from that of the judge writing an opinion. The former may state his
position from the point of view of an objective examination of the court
as an institution. The latter must deal with doctrines as realities. The
penalty of uncompromising realism on the part of the judge is the
disappearance of courts as we now know them. The penalty of the belief
that the legal scholar need only state fundamental principles in a
judicial way is that uncompromising realists will flourish. The
imponderable psychological factors involved in the necessity that
critics and judges adopt different standards of values in their
respective rôles may be expressed in an analogy.

The operation of our judicial institutions may be likened to the
presentation of a play. The judges are the actors on the stage moving
the audience with great lines, impressively delivered. To some in the
audience the lines carry moral lessons, inspirational ideals, and
definite directions as to how they should act in situations similar to
the one presented. To others the lines have the moving effect of great
art. Every audience will contain both types, and every person in the
audience will swing backward and forward between these two points of
view. The litigant who has sponsored the performance has been ushered
out because he was disturbing the audience (just as the formulation of
the principles of substantive law is constantly aimed at getting rid of
the litigant by making the law so certain that litigation will be
unnecessary, or telling him to resort to arbitration, or the action of a
commission). Unquestionably the play is exercising a stabilizing
influence on the manners and customs of the community.

Suppose into this very satisfactory situation we introduce a realist who
insists on interrupting the actors in their most impressive speeches by
telling the audience that it is only a theatrical performance. Or
suppose that one of the actors bends over the footlights in an aside to
explain that he is only an actor in a play. Obviously the effect of the
play is destroyed.

Suppose, on the other hand, that the directors of the play are composed
of fundamentalists who are firmly convinced of the truth and objective
importance of the great lines of all the plays in the past. Because of
that belief they insist that the principle actor repeat Hamlet's
soliloquy in "Desire Under the Elms." Such a restatement would destroy
the play as effectively as the interruptions of the realists, and might
even make the play so dull that the audience would prefer to listen to
the realist rather than the actors. The only worthwhile critic or
director would be the one who considered the utility of any line to
produce the effect at which he consciously aimed within the limits of
the setting in which it was to be delivered.

Such a figure of speech is significant, not in depicting absolute truth
but in picturing what the writer considers to be a useful attitude in
America today. The details of legal philosophy are not so significant as
the general attitudes or approaches to problems which they induce. There
is no absolutely true approach because "in the house of jurisprudence
there are many mansions."[^42] The happy phrase "relativist-realist
jurisprudence"[^43] recently coined by Dean Pound is a short way of
saying that an objective examination of courts may not be so necessary
in England where appellate courts confine their observations to a few
hundred volumes as it is in America when we seek to prevent the
confusion of a yearly output of twenty-five thousand printed opinions.
We have a very practical problem before us, to make our way of judicial
expression more intelligible, and our judicial principles and ideals
more effective. The writer thinks that it can only be solved by
determining what problems may be removed from the rigid impersonal
atmosphere of substantive law and brought down into the practical
atmosphere of procedure. This is not a denial of the necessity of a
rigid philosophy of substantive law in our judicial system. It is simply
an attempt to point out that the legal scholar or critic, by centering
his attention on the judicial institution in connection with the
problems with which it is confronted, can determine which of these
problems should be treated with the attitude of substantive law, and
which with the attitude of "procedure."[^44] In that way rather than
in the assumption that historical categories can only be changed by
legislatures, which do not and can not understand them, lies the way to
the clarification of our judicial expression. Without an objective
examination of the judicial institution itself, we are likely to be
trapped by our old phrases, and to feel that we must continue to use
them long after this utility has disappeared.





[^1]: [1](#2_preface.xhtml#endnote-1){.endnote-mark}^ Elihu Root,
    quoted in American Law Institute Is Organized (1923) 9 A. B. A. J.
    137.

[^2]: [2](#2_preface.xhtml#endnote-2){.endnote-mark}^ The impossibility
    of making accurate generalizations about schools of legal thought
    today is shown by Llewellyn in Some Realism about Realism ---
    Responding to Dean Pound (1931) 44 HARV. L. Rev. 1222. One may
    nevertheless be permitted to give one's general impressions.

[^3]: [3](#2_preface.xhtml#endnote-3){.endnote-mark}^ "Our times may
    well come to be named, by future dealers in half truths, the Tired
    Age. Disillusionment is a mood of fashion as much as a form of ennui
    after the war's great effort. Whatever the cause, our politics are
    devoid of ardor and social reform has lost its romance. Such being
    the mental climate, one would expect jurisprudence to be in the
    doldrums and to earn its title as the dreary science. Alas for these
    generalizations about the main currents of thought! The waters of
    law are unwontedly alive. New winds are blowing on old doctrines,
    the critical spirit infiltrates traditional formulas, philosophic
    inquiry is pursued without apology as it becomes clearer that
    decisions are functions of some juristic philosophy." (Italics
    mine.) Frankfurter, The Early Writings of O. W. Holmes, Jr. (1931)
    44 HARV. L. REV. 717.

[^4]: [4](#2_preface.xhtml#endnote-4){.endnote-mark}^ Cf. COOLEY,
    SOCIAL PROCESS (1927).

[^5]: [5](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-5){.endnote-mark}^ See
    Moore and Hope, An Institutional Approach to the Law of Commercial
    Banking (1929) 38 YALE L. J. 703.

[^6]: [6](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-6){.endnote-mark}^
    Moore, Rational Basis of Legal Institutions (1923) 23 Col. L. REV.
    609. Here Mr. Moore sets out the importance of institutional habits
    as distinguished from legal principles.

[^7]: [7](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-7){.endnote-mark}^ For
    some purposes any definition of "substantive law" which puts the
    entire emphasis on the so-called "science of law" and ignores
    definite directions and institutional habits would be too narrow.
    For the purpose of an objective examination of courts, however, we
    wish to deal with the peculiar conceptions which are incident to an
    independent judiciary. A rule receives very different treatments
    when applied by an executive and applied by a court. We are
    examining the conceptions which cause the difference in treatment,
    not the rule itself. "... decisions are functions of some juristic
    philosophy." See Frankfurter, loc. cit. supra note 3.

[^8]: [8](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-8){.endnote-mark}^
    Parker, Social Progress and the Law (1930) 16 A. B. A. J. 701, 707.

[^9]: [9](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-9){.endnote-mark}^
    Without the mystical concept of a "court " which induces such
    speeches it would be impossible to build up a reverential attitude
    toward such a thing as the "jurisdictional nature" of process, which
    still exists in defiance of common sense, and which is independent
    of any particular statute governing process. For example, see
    BOWERS, CIVIL PROCESS AND ITS SERVICE (1927) Preface.

[^10]: [10](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-10){.endnote-mark}^
    Quotation from Root in Thayer, Recall of Judicial Decisions, Sen.
    Doc. No. 28,63d Cong. Ist Sess. (1913) 9. The writer hastens to
    point out that he means no criticism of such a speech. Another kind
    of speech would not have had its effectiveness. It is the fact that
    such speeches are effective which illustrates our attitude toward
    courts.

[^11]: [11](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-11){.endnote-mark}^
    Miller, The Evidence and Duty of Being on the Lord's Side in 1 THE
    NATIONAL PREACHER (1826--28) 97.

[^12]: [12](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-12){.endnote-mark}^
    Chicago Tribune, June 24, 1931, at io.

[^13]: [13](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-13){.endnote-mark}^
    CRIMINAL STATISTICS, ENGLAND AND WALES 1927. This figure does not
    include imprisonment for non-support or bastardy cases. Including
    these cases the total is 12,132. See Imprisonment for Debt (1923) 68
    SOL. J. 178, (1928) 72 id. 676.

[^14]: [14](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-14){.endnote-mark}^
    For a description of the procedural method by which imprisonment is
    accomplished, see PARRY, THE GOSPEL AND THE LAW (1928) c. V. In 1918
    during the war only 206 persons were imprisoned on the judgment
    summons process. It is significant to point out that the author of
    this spirited attack on the process blames the \" law," rather than
    the courts.

[^15]: [15](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-15){.endnote-mark}^
    HEWART, THE NEW DESPOTISM (1929) 17.

[^16]: [16](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-16){.endnote-mark}^
    (1929) 15 A. B. A. J. 747.

[^17]: [17](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-17){.endnote-mark}^
    See HEWART, THE NEW DESPOTISM (1929) 45.

[^18]: [18](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-18){.endnote-mark}^
    The statements which follow, of course, do not attempt to be
    accurate but rather to set out a popular notion which still affects
    much legal scholarship, particularly that portion of it devoted to
    clarifying doctrine by logical analysis. An accurate general
    statement of what legal scholars are doing is, of course, impossible
    because they are doing so many things. It is, however, the writer's
    belief that the statements which follow are fairly descriptive of an
    attitude which is often instinctively taken. Subjects like torts or
    contracts are usually so separated intellectually from jurisprudence
    in textbook thought that an instinctive conventional approach is
    adopted in the former which may be denied in the latter subject.

[^19]: [19](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-19){.endnote-mark}^
    The perennial dispute as to whether facts and social conditions or
    doctrine should be the basis of legal study owes its continuance
    largely to the fact that when we speak of "law" we usually refer to
    all of these situations at once, without differentiation between
    them. We might add still others. For example: We often call "law"
    those protective devices which lawyers use to safeguard a client
    from all possible trouble with courts; as, for example, the long
    forms which attempt to protect a sales contract of an automobile
    from the hazards of the courts of fortyeight states. No one reads
    the form until trouble arises and then it becomes the stuff out of
    which legal arguments are made. We also refer to as "law" the ideals
    which give prestige and authority to courts. That different
    approaches are necessary in these different situations is indicated
    by Pound, The Call for a Realist Jurisprudence (1931) 44 HARV. L.
    REV. 697. A somewhat different classification, but with the same
    idea in mind, is found in Frank, Are Judges Human (1931) 80 U, OF
    PA, L, REV. 233, 259.

[^20]: [20](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-20){.endnote-mark}^
    See DICKINSON, ADMINISTRATIVE JUSTICE AND THE SUPREMACY OF LAW
    (1927) 15, n.24.

[^21]: [21](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-21){.endnote-mark}^
    Hodges v. Public Sery. Comm., 159 S. E. 834 (W. Va. 1931).

[^22]: [22](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-22){.endnote-mark}^
    GOODHART, ESSAYS IN JURISPRUDENCE AND THE COMMON LAW (1931).

[^23]: [23](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-23){.endnote-mark}^
    By changing the name of a suit to "motion for judgment" in Virginia,
    the federal requirement for summons was avoided because the notice
    was not "technically process." Leas & McVitty v. Merriman, 132 Fed.
    510 (W. D. Va. 1904).

[^24]: [24](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-24){.endnote-mark}^
    We take Gardiner's interpretation of the incident which he states as
    follows: "James was probably inclined to rebel rather against the
    yoke of the lawyers than against that of the law. What he wanted was
    to prevent the common law judges from overthrowing the
    ecclesiastical jurisdiction." 2 GARDINER, HISTORY OF ENGLAND (1883)
    39.

[^25]: [25](#3_the-function-of-the-.xhtml#endnote-25){.endnote-mark}^
    Prohibitions del Roy, 7 Co. 63 (1608).

[^26]: [26](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-26){.endnote-mark}^
    23 HALSBURY, THE LAWS OF ENGLAND (1912) 135; Higgins, English Courts
    and Procedure (1916) II BULL. AM. JUD. Soc. 40 et seq.

[^27]: [27](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-27){.endnote-mark}^
    "The Act provides that the Court of Criminal Appeal shall allow an
    appeal against conviction if it thinks the verdict of the jury
    should be set aside on the ground that it is unreasonable or cannot
    be supported by the evidence or resulted from a wrong decision on
    any question of law or if it thinks that on any ground there was a
    miscarriage of justice. In all other cases it must dismiss the
    appeal and in this connection it is provided that even though the
    court is of the opinion that the point raised might be decided in
    favor of the appellant it may still dismiss the appeal if it
    considers that 'no substantial miscarriage of justice has actually
    occurred.'" HOWARD, CRIMINAL JUSTICE IN ENGLAND (1931) 280.

[^28]: [28](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-28){.endnote-mark}^
    "As the costs in even a simple appeal may easily amount to £100 or
    £200 it is obvious that a litigant will hesitate before taking this
    step." GOODHART, ESSAYS IN JURISPRUDENCE AND THE COMMON LAW (1931)
    215.

[^29]: [29](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-29){.endnote-mark}^
    "Perhaps the reason why the English Lawyer is not dissatisfied with
    the present system is that the \' myriad' precedents do not exist.
    The English cases to 1865 are reprinted in the English Reports in
    about 175 volumes. The semiofficial Law Reports from 1865 to the
    present date occupy about 450 volumes. Thus 625 volumes make up a
    complete working library." GOODHART, op. cit. supra note 28, at 57.

[^30]: [30](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-30){.endnote-mark}^
    "Only a small proportion of the decided cases are reported each
    year; unless a case deals with a novel point of law ---and novelty
    is strictly construed --- it will rarely find its way into the
    Reports. . It is hardly surprising to find that the English lawyer
    has no difficulty in digesting the annual reports, and that he does
    not, therefore, demand a change in the established system."
    GOODHART, op. cit. supra note 28, at 57.\
    Of course English writers would deny the statement that this
    selective process is ever used as a method of avoiding inconvenient
    cases. The writer, however, believes that a selective system of
    printing cases inevitably cuts down the possibility of encumbering
    legal principles with qualifications and exceptions, even though
    this is not the conscious intent.

[^31]: [31](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-31){.endnote-mark}^
    "A search through the English periodicals since 1900 does not show a
    single article or note by an English lawyer in which the system has
    been adversely criticized. No modern English poet has arisen to
    denounce the English Law as Tennyson did seventy years ago:\
    'Mastering the lawless science of our law,\
    That codeless myriad of precedent,\
    That wilderness of single instances,\
    Through which a few, by wit or fortune led,\
    May beat a pathway out to wealth or fame."\
    GOODHART, op. cit. supra note 28, at 56--57. The writer contends
    that the reason the poets of today are silent is because the English
    have devised procedural escapes from the consequences of too rigid
    application of the rule of stare decisis, rather than because of any
    sudden change in the nature of English judges.

[^32]: [32](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-32){.endnote-mark}^
    As in FRANKFURTER AND GREENE, THE LABOR INJUNCTION (1930).

[^33]: [33](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-33){.endnote-mark}^
    Frankfurter and Landis (1927). See also Frankfurter and Landis, The
    Business of the Supreme Court at October Term, 1928 (1929) 43 HARV.
    L. REV. 33, The Business of the Supreme Court at October Term, 1929
    (1930) 44 id. I, The Business of the Supreme Court at October Term,
    1930 (1931) 45 id. 271.

[^34]: [34](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-34){.endnote-mark}^
    (1931) 44 Harv. L. Rev. 889.

[^35]: [35](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-35){.endnote-mark}^
    (1931) 31 COL. L. REV. 1073.

[^36]: [36](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-36){.endnote-mark}^
    This is becoming less true every year. Dean Pound in The Call for a
    Realistic Jurisprudence set out the need for a discussion of the
    utility of doctrine in the judicial process and also the relevancy
    of a study of the psychological factors involved. (1931) 44 HARV. L.
    Rev. 697. Leon Green, in JUDGE AND JURY (1930), emphasizes the
    function of legal doctrine in the delimitation of functions of trial
    and appellate courts and juries. Two recent articles in the Yale Law
    Journal indicate by their titles that the function of legal concepts
    instead of their logical analysis is the center of interest.
    Cormack, Legal Concepts in cases of Eminent Domain (1931) 41 YALE L.
    J. 221, and McCormick, The Parol Evidence Rule as a Procedural
    Device for Control of the Jury (1932) 41 YALE L. J. 365.
    Nevertheless the statement still represents a widely prev nt
    attitude.

[^37]: [37](#4_the-effect-of-too-mu.xhtml#endnote-37){.endnote-mark}^
    This is illustrated by an interesting controversy over the nature of
    the code " Cause of Action." Dean Clark proposed a test which left
    the determination of the extent of the cause to the discretion of
    the court, having in mind the facts of the particular case. CLARK,
    CODE PLEADING (1928) 83. This was attacked on the ground of (1) lack
    of certainty and (2) lack of symmetry by three able scholars all of
    whom sought to define the fundamental elements of the term in the
    various dissimilar situations in which it was used. McCaskill,
    Actions and Causes of Actions (1925) 34 VALE L. J. 614; Harris, What
    is a Cause of Action (1928) 16 CALIF. L. Rev. 459; Gavit, The Code
    Cause of Action: Joinder and Counterclaims (1930) 30 COL. L. Rev.
    802. The significance of the controversy lies in the fact that in
    spite of the dialectic ability of the three last named authors
    seeking the fundamental elements of the " cause of action" they not
    only disagree with each other, but also with the earlier definitions
    of the term.

[^38]: [38](#5_procedure-as-an-esca.xhtml#endnote-38){.endnote-mark}^
    Foster, Place of Trial in Civil Actions (1930) 43 HARV. L. REV.
    1217, Place of Trial -Interstate Application of Intrastate Methods
    of Adjustment (1930) 44 id. 41.

[^39]: [39](#5_procedure-as-an-esca.xhtml#endnote-39){.endnote-mark}^
    The uniform sales act in its generalizations as to when title
    passes, offers a simple set of principles which are not descriptive
    of the numberless situations where they are employed, but which
    serve as a classification of these cases at least as good as any
    which the writer has seen suggested.

[^40]: [40](#5_procedure-as-an-esca.xhtml#endnote-40){.endnote-mark}^
    To the writer's mind Mr. Foster establishes this conclusively in his
    articles. See note 38, supra.

[^41]: [41](#5_procedure-as-an-esca.xhtml#endnote-41){.endnote-mark}^
    It is assumed here that if the sole purpose of instructions in
    negligence cases were to put the jury, unfamiliar with legal
    concepts, in the proper frame of mind to determine liability, and
    such instructions were not considered as accurate expressions of the
    "law of negligence" many of our elaborate definitions of negligence,
    and its qualifying doctrines, would disappear. The two questions,
    when will a court permit a jury to pass on a case, and how will the
    court talk to the jury, could be sharply distinguished in any
    formulation of negligence law which treated the question as one of
    distribution of power. See GREEN, JUDGE AND JURY (1930) 153 et seq.

[^42]: [42](#5_procedure-as-an-esca.xhtml#endnote-42){.endnote-mark}^
    Pound, supra note 19, at 711.

[^43]: [43](#5_procedure-as-an-esca.xhtml#endnote-43){.endnote-mark}^
    Id. at 710.

[^44]: [44](#5_procedure-as-an-esca.xhtml#endnote-44){.endnote-mark}^
    It must be apparent that the writer has used the terms "substantive
    law" and "procedure" to describe different attitudes, rather than
    the classification found in the law school curriculum. Many of the
    concepts which are ordinarily denominated "procedural" have been
    treated with the attitude of "substantive law" ough this is becoming
    less frequent. See Mc U; Harr and vit, all supra note 37.
