_India's unique identification
number project has been
sold on the promise that it
will make every citizen, the
poor in particular, visible to
the State. But the UID project
raises crucial issues relating
to profiling, tracking and
surveillance, and it may well
facilitate a dramatic change
in the relationship between
the State and the people. The
Unique Identification Authority
of India has not acknowledged
these concerns so far. And now,
nowhere in the proposed draft
bill that it has prepared have
these issues been addressed nor
have clauses been drafted to
prevent abuse of information that
will be collected by the agency.
With so many questions on the
project --- regarding biometrics,
security and privacy --- yet to be
answered, it is far from time for
parliamentary approval. As has
been observed, the Constitution
is expected to provide the citizen
with dignity and privacy; but
these are missing in the
UID project._

\ 

In February 2009, the unique identification
number (UID) project was set up
within the Planning Commission.
Since August (July) 2009, when Nandan
Nilekani was appointed as its chairperson,
the Unique Identification Authority of
India (UIDAI) has been propagating the
idea of the UID which each resident in
India will be given.

The project pegs its legitimacy on what
it will do for the poor. It promises that it
will give the poor an identity, with which
they may become visible to the state. The
UID number is expected to plug leakages,
including in the Public Distribution
System (PDS), ease payments to be made
under the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (NREGS), and enable
achievement of targets in consonance
with the right to education. Service delivery
is a central theme in its promotional
literature. The raising of expectations is,
however, tempered by a quick caveat that
the "UID number will only guarantee identity,
not rights, benefits, or entitlements".

The UID database is intended to hold
information including the name, address
and biometrics of the person. It has been
reiterated with remarkable regularity that
the UIDAI will not be gathering information
that could lead to profiling, so, religion,
caste, language and income, for instance,
will not be brought on to the UID database.

The UIDAI has strained every nerve to
explain that it will not be a database from
which others may derive information
about any person. The UIDAI will merely
"authenticate", i.e., it will give a "yes" or
"no" answer when asked whether a name,
address and biometric indicator tally. That
is, it will attest to the veracity of the identity
being asserted by a person by checking
on its database. If the details tally, it
will say no more.

The operation for being invested with
an identity goes through stages: enrolling
with an enroller/registrar who will set
down the basic biographic details such as
name, address, father/guardian's name
(and UID number), mother's name (and
UID number) and collect the biometrics ---
photographs, all 10 fingerprints and iris
scan, de-duplication (which will be done
by the UIDAI to make certain that there is
one identity for one person), updating the
database whenever any change occurs in
relation to the information on the database
(for instance, when there is a name
or address change, the responsibility for
which will rest with the individual).

The UIDAI has said that getting on to the
UID database is voluntary. That is, it is
clarified, there will be no compulsion
from the UIDAI. But, if other agencies
make the UID number essential in their
transactions, that is a different matter.
The UIDAI has been signing memoranda of
understanding (MOUs) with a range of
agencies including banks, state governments
and the Life Insurance Corporation
of India (LIC) to be "registrars", who then
may insist that their customers enrol on
the UID to receive continued service.

Given the dramatic changes that the
UID could bring to the relationship between
the state and the people, it should
cause concern that there has been so little
public debate around the UID. There is an
unquestioned benignness that is being
attributed to the project, which could be
explained in part by the image of Nandan
Nilekani, whose salience to the project
could foster a sense that this is a project
around technology, and not about identity.
The rhetoric has stayed focused on
the poor, which has lent the project legitimacy
and there has been no discussion
from within the establishment on the
possible downsides.

One concern that has been raised consistently
is on the question of privacy ---
that information held in a central repository
could result in breaches of privacy.
The invasion of privacy that technology
has facilitated and routinised in recent
years has eroded the relevance of traditional
notions of privacy. The experience
with abandoning the idea of privacy is relatively
recent, and it will be a while before
its value is reconstituted and the idea resurrected.
The introduction to the UID has
been in terms of investing every resident
with an identity, as a single stop for
authenticating identity, as a de-duplication
exercise, for plugging leakages, as a
tracking device, and as a wage transferring
device.

There are, however, other concerns that
have been voiced and which remain unresolved.
They include the contexts of convergence,
national security, the national
population register (NPR), and the shaky
edifice of biometrics on which this superstructure
is being built.

# Convergence

The UID literature does not use the word,
yet convergence is a predictable and inevitable
consequence of the UID project. Convergence
is about combining information.
There are various pieces of information
that we hand over to a range of agencies
when buying, say, a railway ticket, maintaining
a bank account, registering in a
university, getting work at an NREGS
worksite, taking out an insurance policy,
buying a motorcycle, paying telephone
bills, etc. Currently, with only the name
and a possibly correct address, it will not
be easy to profile a person or track them.
The information is held in what are called
"silos", that is, discrete towers holding
information that has been handed over by
an individual in relation to a defined purpose.
If it were possible to create bridges
to link these silos, it would wrest control
of information on the individual and make
it available, metaphorically and literally,
at the tap of a computer key.

There is a dark joke making its rounds
which would be funny, but is not, and it
runs like this:

>Operator: Thank you for calling Pizza Plaza.
>May I have your ...
>
>Customer: May I place an order?
>
>Operator: Can I have your multipurpose _ID_
>card number, sir?
>
>Customer: It is, hold on ... 21356102049998--45--54610
>
>Operator: Welcome back from Japan,
>Mr Singh.
>
>Customer: May I order your Seafood Pizza ...
>
>Operator: That's not a good idea, sir.
>
>Customer: Why would you say that?
>
>Operator: According to your medical records,
>sir, you have high blood pressure and even
>higher cholesterol level.
>
>Customer: What? ... What do you recommend
>then?
>
>Operator: Try our Low Fat Pizza. You'll like it.
>
>Customer: How would you know that?
>
>Operator: You borrowed a book titled
>_Popular Dishes_ from the National Library
>last week, sir.
>
>Customer: Oh ... Have three family size
>delivered. How much would that cost?
>Operator: That should be enough for your
>family of 5, sir. That will be ₹500.
>
>Customer: Do you accept payment by credit
>card?
>
>Operator: I'm afraid you have to pay us cash,
>sir. Your credit card is over the limit and you
>owe your bank ₹23,000 since October last
>year. And that's not including the late payment
>charges on your housing loan.
>
>Customer: I guess I have to run to the neighbourhood
>ATM and withdraw some cash
>before your guy arrives.
>
>Operator: Oh, no, sir. Your records show that
>you've reached your daily limit on machine
>withdrawal today.
>
>Customer: Never mind, just send the pizzas,
>I'll have the cash ready. How long will that
>take?
>
>Operator: About 45 minutes, sir, but if you
>can't wait you can always come and collect it
>in your Nano. Will there be anything else, sir?
>
>Customer: No ... By the way ... make sure you
>send the 3 free bottles of cola as advertised.
>
>Operator: But, sir, your health records say
>you're a diabetic. ...
>
>Customer: #\$\$^%&\$@\$% ^
>
>Operator: Please watch your language,
>sir. Remember on 15 July you were convicted
>of using abusive language at a
>policeman ... ?

It was reported last year that Apollo
Hospitals had written to the UIDAI and to
the Knowledge Commission to link UID
numbers with health profiles of individuals
and offered to manage the health
records (_Business Standard_, 27 August 2009).
It has already embarked on a
project "Health Superhighway" that reportedly
connects doctors, hospitals and
pharmacies, who would be able to communicate
with each other and access health
records. This, then, is no longer hypothetical.
The UID is poised to be the bridge between
silos of personal information.

This convergence of information may be
efficient for business and meet standards
of efficiency, but there are those who
would argue that it profiles individuals and
exposes them to market and other forces in
ways which are intrusive, and which could
make them insecure, and unsafe.

# National Security

Surveillance is a concern, and a term
that is missing altogether in the UIDAI
documents.

There are three initiatives that, together,
form a pattern that is disturbing. The UID
only produces a number which is a tag
that is poised to be "universal" and "ubiquitous".
Its capacity to link disparate pieces
of information is difficult to dispute. Place
this in the context of the National
Intelligence Grid (NATGRID), and the
Home Minister P Chidambaram's statement
begins to sound ominous. "Under
NATGRID", he is reported as having said,
"21 sets of databases will be networked to
achieve quick seamless and secure access
to desired information for intelligence
and enforcement agencies" (_The Hindu_,
14 February 2010). This is to enable them
"to detect patterns, trace sources for
monies and support, track travellers, and
identify those who must be watched, investigated,
disabled and neutralised". Many
of these intelligence agencies, including
the Research and Analysis Wing (RAW)
and the Intelligence Bureau (IB), are neither
creatures of the law, nor are they subject
to oversight. And they are outside the
Right to Information Act. Vice-President
Hamid Ansari, quoting an intelligence
expert, reportedly asked: "How shall a
democracy ensure its secret intelligence
apparatus becomes neither a vehicle for
conspiracy nor a suppressor of traditional
liberties of democratic self-government?"
(_Times of India_, 20 January 2010). By all
accounts, the question has not been
answered yet.

In November 2009, newspapers reported
Chidambaram's statement that the government
would soon be setting up a DNA
data bank. There has been no word on the
subject since, but on 12 July 2010, the
_Indian Express_ carried news of an impatient
debate that has erupted about
speeding up DNA data banks to hold DNA
data of convicts. This is just a stretch away
from extending it to more classes of the
population.

The use of science and technology to
practise the politics of suspicion is a possibility
that is finding its way into becoming
a fact.

# National Population Register

The Census has acquired a disturbing dimension
with the NPR being appended to
it. The NPR is not an exercise undertaken
under the Census Act, 1948. It is being
carried out under the Citizenship Act of
1955 and the Citizenship (Registration of
Citizens and Issue of National Identity
Cards) Rules 2003. Why should that matter?
Because there is an express provision
regarding "confidentiality" in the Census
Act, which is not merely missing in the
Citizenship Act and Rules. But there is an
express objective of making the information
available to the UIDAI, which marks
an important distinction between the two
processes. Section 15 of the Census Act
categorically makes the information that
we give to the census agency "not open to
inspection nor admissible in evidence".
The Census Act enables the collection of
information so the state has a profile of
the population; it is expressly not to profile
the individual.

It is the admitted position that the
information gathered in the house-to-house
survey, and the biometrics collected
during the exercise, will feed into the UID
database. The UID document says the
information that the database will hold
will only serve to identify if the person is
who the person says he, or she, is. It will
not hold any personal details about anybody.
What the document does not say is
that it will provide the bridge between
the "silos" of data that are already in existence,
and which the NPR will also bring
into being. So, with the UID as the key, the
profile of any person resident in India can
be built up.

The Citizenship Rules 2003 strips the
veneer of voluntariness from the UID. It
classes every individual and every "head
of family" as an informant, who will be
penalised if every person in the household
is not in the NPR, or if the information
is outdated.

The NPR is also slated to collect biometrics
--- photographs, fingerprints, iris. The
coercion in the Citizenship Rules is not the
only aspect which is worrying. The rules
also envisage an exercise in sifting the
citizen from the resident. The person collecting
the information is expected to exercise
judgment in deciding whether the
person whose details are being taken
down may not be a citizen. If there is any
doubt, such person will be categorised to
be subject to further investigation. The
NPR, like the Census, is carried out by laypeople,
and the untrained mind is asked
to discern and judge matters that could
lead to inclusion, or statelessness.

At the tail end of June 2010, the UIDAI
website uploaded a "proposed draft bill":
the National Identification Authority of
India Bill, 2010. Comments were asked to
be sent within two weeks, by 13 July 2010.
Various individuals and groups have sent
in their comments, but have asked that the
time to respond be extended so that they
may discuss it and understand it more fully
before taking their position on the Bill.

One of the provisions that has raised
concern is clause 33, which reads:

>33. Nothing contained in the sub-section (3)
>of section 30 shall apply in respect of ---
>
>(a) any disclosure of information (including
>identity information or details of authentication)
>made pursuant to an order of a competent
>court; or
>
>(b) any disclosure of information (including
>identity information) made in the interests
>of national security in pursuance of a direction
>to that effect issued by an officer not below
>the rank of Joint Secretary or equivalent
>in the Central Government after obtaining
>approval of the Minister in charge.

Although some commentators on the
UID project (and that includes me) have
written about surveillance, tracking, profiling
and social and executive control of
the people by the state and its agents, the
UIDAI has not acknowledged these concerns
so far. This is despite the "Awareness
and Communication Report" which the
UIDAI commissioned and which advised
the authority on how to anticipate and
sidestep the unease that people may have,
registering that:

>the idea of giving out information and affixing
one's thumbprint to a document without
fully understanding its implications, compounded
with the fact that too many non-state
players are visibly involved could pose
a barrier to enrolment as well. The fear of
individuals being in the government's radar
and the ability of various groups to play on
this fear is another likely challenge.

Neither the Bill nor any document produced
in the process has, however, addressed
any of these concerns. What is reflected
in the document is only the need to
ensure that these anxieties do not come in
the way of completing the exercise.

Such a major shift in public policy surely
cannot occur without a discussion preceding
it, a deliberation on the import, and
consequences, of such a change, and a
reasoned decision taken on the matter.
The constitutionality of such a move is
questionable. Among the issues that are
likely to arise, there are two that Justice
Rajendra Babu raised in the presence of
Nandan Nilekani and his team at a consultation
held in the National Law School,
Bangalore on 23 November 2009: the
Constitution guarantees us dignity and
privacy, he said. Both seem to have been
given a miss in the way the UID project has
been conceived.

The combination of UID, NATGRID and
the emerging idea of the DNA bank, makes
state control of a population a very real
possibility. To treat every person as a suspect,
and to create systems that would
support such a practice, is a highly questionable
act of a state. That the State and
its agents have faced the charge of being
communal, and of having been involved
in torture, fake encounters, forced disappearances
and complicity in crime adds
to the amalgam of concerns. The Bill does
not acknowledge it, but those within the
system cannot be prosecuted without
"sanction" of the powers-that-be. It seems
like a prescription for impunity where the
protocol for protecting the data is
breached from within the state apparatus.

Discussions around the Bill will have to
deal with the issues thrown up by the introduction
of the element of "national security",
especially as it is located within a
web of UID, NATGRID and a DNA data bank.

# Biometrics

The most disturbing aspect of the UID
project is the linking of identity, and
rights, entitlements, citizenship and recognition,
to biometrics. The UID project
has settled on three metrics: facial recognition
through the photograph, fingerprints
(all eight fingers and two thumbs),
and the iris. The UIDAI documents reveal a
state of ignorance, and unpreparedness,
that is inexplicable. Quotes will set it out
most clearly:

In the UIDAI's "Notice Inviting Application
for Hiring Biometrics Consultant", for
a period of six months starting March
2010, it was written:

>While NIST (the United States agency) documents
the fact that the accuracy of biometric
matching is extremely dependent on demographics
and environmental conditions, there
is a lack of a sound study that documents the
accuracy achievable on Indian demographics
(i.e., larger percentage of rural population)
and in Indian environmental conditions (i.e.,
extremely hot and humid climate and facilities
without air-conditioning) ... The 'quality'
assessments of fingerprint data is not sufficient
to fully understand the achievable
de-duplication accuracy. The next step is to
acquire biometrics data from the Indian rural
conditions in two sessions (with a time difference)
and assess the matchability ...

That is, the capacity to capture biometrics
with any accuracy _has not even been
tested yet_, and the project already has
₹7 crore committed to it for just this
year, and the whole apparatus through
the NPR moving for it. This demands
an explanation.

In a cryptic note, the Notice reads: "The
biometric evaluations are statistical. The
statistical significance of the results are
required to be analysed for the UIDAI."

That is, the margin of error is not
yet known.

In "Ensuring Uniqueness: Collecting
Iris Biometrics for the Unique _ID_ Mission",
the report refers to the Biometrics Committee
set up under the UIDAI which had,
in January 2010, been non-committal
about the use of the third biometric, since
"... in the absence of empirical Indian data,
it is not possible for the committee to precisely
predict the improvement in the accuracy
of de-duplication to the fusion of
fingerprint and iris scores." The document
acknowledges "technology risks",
including the inability to guarantee biometrics
of "high quality across its thousands
of enrolment points". This capture
would help in enrolment, but not in authentication
since the equipment will not
be available in most places. The compromise:
"for authentication, the use of fingerprinting
will be sufficient". This could
spell trouble for calloused hands and
marred fingerprints --- which would include
those doing manual labour and agricultural
operations, whose fingerprints
cannot be authenticated.

On 17 July 2010, the _Economic Times_
reported that "people with 'low-quality'
fingerprints and corneal/cataract problems"
could "pose difficulties" for the
project. "Millions of Indians working in
agriculture, construction workers and
other manual labourers have worn-out
fingers due to a lifetime of hard labour"
resulting in "low-quality" fingerprints.
The iris scan cannot be done on people
with corneal blindness or corneal scars. A
study done in 2005 at the All India Institute
of Medical Sciences estimated six to
eight million people in India had corneal
blindness, and many more people would
have corneal scars. A Hyderabad based
eye institute identified cataract, which
results from nutritional deficiency and
prolonged exposure to sunlight and ultraviolet
rays, and cataract surgery, as
almost certain to affect the iris. This is
about the people that the UIDAI projects
as its main targets. A scientist with the
Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research is cited as suggesting that "they
could use DNA fingerprinting in such
cases". Apart from the reduction of a
people to a subject-population, these suggestions
are inexcusably casual about
using techniques that will be of no help to
the person so identified.

The draft Bill does not deal with any of
these concerns. In clause 3 (1), it declares
that "every resident shall be entitled to
obtain" a UID number, but nowhere in the
Bill is there a clause that no agency may
refuse services to a person because they do
not have such a number, thus leaving the
field open for compulsion. Nowhere in the
Bill is there an acknowledgement of the
extraordinary powers of surveillance, and
invasion of privacy by government and private
agencies that the UID will be facilitating,
so there are no limits set on the uses of
the number and of the networks of information
it could be used to generate. So convergence
is facilitated, and the person has no
control over it, nor is it a wrong in law.

For those who are willing to place their
faith in the UID clause 12 May cause them
to pause. It reads: "The Authority shall
consist of a Chairperson and two part-time
members to be appointed by the
Central Government", and they may be reappointed,
or ejected, by the central government.
There are sketchy offences of
"intentionally" accessing the UID database
and damaging, stealing, altering information
or disrupting the data. But it provides
no means by which a person whose data is
stored to know that such an offence has
been committed; and it does not allow
prosecution to be launched except on a
complaint made by the authority or someone
authorised by it. Experience has revealed
the failure of regulation; yet it is on
regulation by the authority that a whole
population is asked to place its trust. There
is no grievance redressal mechanism mandated
by law; it may be set up by regulation
or it may not. There is a clause in passing
that recognises that the data could reach
people beyond the borders; but no idea at
all on how to deal with that situation.

The demographic information gathered
may not be elaborate at the start,
but clause 23(b) leaves an opening for
expanding the demographic and biometric
data that may be collected. Most
damning is the passing reference in
the general "powers and functions
of authority" to the use of the UID
number "for delivery of various benefits
and services as may be provided by
regulation". That is all there is to indicate
that service delivery to the poor is the
object of this exercise. The issues on
which the UID project is piggyback
riding for its legitimacy are too serious to
be trivialised.

The MoUs the UIDAI has entered into
with "registrars" that include banks, state
governments and the LIC have been signed
with no statutory backing and no legal
power to collect, hold and transmit information
from and about people. Biometrics
has not even been tested, despite Indian
demographic and environmental conditions
being known to make a significant
difference to the quality of biometric capture.
In a May 2010 paper prepared for the
UIDAI --- "A UID Numbering Scheme" --- is
written: "We expect the UID system to live
on for centuries". This, then, is a tagging
device that is expected to last well beyond
a person's lifetime.

The non-seriousness of the Bill, and the
refusal to confront the hard issues, are a
slight to democracy which must be remedied
before the project progresses to create
a _fait accompli_. There are murmurs
that the Bill is to be introduced in the
monsoon session of Parliament. It would
be trite to say that, when biometric accuracy
is still in question, and so many questions
remain unanswered, it is nowhere
near time for parliamentary consideration,
or approval.
