The West Bengal government's _Operation Barga_ completed one
year in September 1979. It is a crash programme undertaken by
the Left Front government for recording of _bargadars_[^/1] within a
specified time frame. Recording of _bargadars_ was also a part of the
programme of the last Settlement Operation. Then what induced
the government to undertake this crash programme? The answer
requires a discussion in some detail.

There are three major constraints to _barga_ recording. Firstly
very few _bargadars_ are aware that the recording of their names
gives them protection against illegal eviction. But they know that
any attempt made by a _bargadar_ to get his name recorded will
antagonize the landowner. Secondly, the _bargadars_ are exploited
by the landowners in a variety of ways. The common method of
exploitation is that they are given a smaller share of the produce
than they are entitled to. As provided in the West Bengal Land
Reforms Act, the produce of a _barga_ land is divisible between the
_bargadar_ and the landowner in the proportion of 50:50 where
plough, cattle, manure and seeds are supplied by the landowner
and in the proportion of 75:25 in other cases. _Bargadars_ hardly get
their share of the produce from the landowners on the basis of this
principle. If the _bargadars_ remained unrecorded, the landowners
would be in a position to continue their exploitation. On the other
hand, recording would strengthen the position of _bargadars_ and the
landowners could be compelled to give them their due share.
Therefore the landowners create all sorts of impediments to _barga_
recording. In many cases _bargadars_ are subjected to economic pressure,
intimidation and threats. Quite often _bargadars_ are physically
assaulted and their houses are set on fire. Institution of cour
cases --- criminal and civil --- is quite common. Under such conditions
it becomes difficult for the _bargadars_ of those areas where the
peasant movement is not strong, to come forward and get their
names recorded. Thirdly, _bargadars_ are mostly indebted to the
landowners who very often are also moneylenders. If in time of
need the landowners refuse to give loans in cash or kind to the
_bargadars_ they are left with no other source from which they can
borrow. If an indebted _bargadar_ comes forward to get his name
recorded, his relations with his landowner immediately get strained
and his source of borrowing dries up. Obviously he shows reluctance
to have his name recorded.

The government officials involved in the earlier recording
operations displayed an attitude of indifference to these constraints
as they felt it was not part of their programme to educate the
_bargadars_ and make them conscious of their rights. Moreover the
officials used to set up the recording camps in the houses of the
rich people of the villages. The entry of the _bargadars_ to these
camps was very much restricted by the vigilance of the landowners
and their henchmen. Under the circumstances it was hardly
possible to bring about tangible results in the recording operations.

With the installation of the Left Front government in 1977,
a wind of change began to blow. The new government was, of
necessity, seized of the problem of hastening the recording operation
for which a reorientation of the attitude of the recording
officials towards the poor villagers was essential. It was felt that
the officials should now play an important role in persuading the
_bargadars_ to come forward on a large scale to have their names
recorded. This could be done effectively only when the _bargadars_
were properly educated about their rights and an atmosphere was
created in which the poor people who had so long been mentally
shaken could speak to the officials freely.

# Reorientation Camps

For this the land reforms department began to organize
reorientation camps in the districts. Each camp was held with the
participation of 30 to 40 poor villagers like _bargadars_, landless
agricultural labourers and small allottees of government vested
lands and about 15 officials like junior land reforms officers,
_kanungos_ (_mouza_ revenue inspectors), agricultural extension officers,
who stayed together for three days in the same premises without
any distinction between an official and a peasant. The atmosphere
in the camp was congenial for a free exchange of views. The
villagers actively participated in the deliberations. They narrated
their past experience, discussed the problems of cultivation and
made an appraisal of the _barga_ recording system.

At the first reorientation camp[^/2] a suggestion was put
forward by the non-official participants that if the government was
really serious about _barga_ recording, special camps should be organized
in areas inhabited by sharecroppers and agricultural
labourers belonging to the backward classes so that the _bargadars_
who have all along been scared of the landlords came forward for
recording their names. This suggestion was accepted by the
government and follow-up action taken up immediately. A special
camp was organized in _mouza_[^/3] Patnabhairabpur within the jurisdiction
of the Polba police station in Hooghly district, on June 8 and 9, 1978.
Wide publicity for the camp was given with the help of the
non-official participants in the first (Halusai) reorientation camp,
and by the beat of drums, distribution of leaflets and by personal
contact. About 200 _bargadars_, mostly belonging to the scheduled
castes and scheduled tribes, came in groups and got their names
recorded. The owners of the lands which these _bargadars_ were
cultivating, were also given time to record their objections, if any.
The officials at the camp received 35 objections which were disposed
of after proper verification. Finally, the names of 191
_bargadars_ were recorded in the Patnabhairabpur _mouza_.

# Methodology of Operation

The outcome of this special camp was very encouraging.
Subsequently, a workshop on land reforms measures was held at
the headquarters of the directorate of land records and survey,
where some operational decisions to hasten the process of _barga_
recording were taken up.[^/4] It was decided to organize camps of
three to four days' duration in the carefully selected priority
pockets having a heavy concentration of _bargadars_. Squads consisting
of _kanungos_, junior land reforms officers, _amins_ (village surveyors)
and clerical staff, under the leadership of a Special Revenue
Officer, Grade II, or a Subdivisional Land Reforms Officer, would
take up the work of _barga_ recording in these pockets. A squad tagged
to one pocket would start its work in a group of _mouzas_ with wide
publicity by organizing group meetings, by the beat of drums, by
personal contact with the _bargadars_ and by using the services of
the mobile units of the state government's department of information
and culture. The publicity would end with a meeting of the
intended beneficiaries in the evening at a place most convenient to
them. In this meeting the rights of _bargadars_, the legal and economic
benefits that they would derive would be clearly explained.

One year's experience of _Operation Barga_ has proved the
efficacy of the above methodology. During the 11 months preceding
August 1979, 7,32,955 _bargadars_ were recorded in 30,795
_mouzas_ in which the total number of _bargadars_ recorded in the last
Settlement Operation was only 2,41,672.[^/5] Thus there has been
nearly a three-fold increase in recording under _Operation Barga_
compared with the Settlement Operation. Top officials of the land
reforms department expect that when _Operation Barga_ is completed,
another two to three lakh _bargadars_ will have their names
recorded. Even then, it is apprehended that about 50 percent of
the existing _bargadars_ will remain unrecorded because the _jotedars_
and landlords are resisting bar ga recording tooth and nail. They
have sought the intervention of the Calcutta High Court and a
spate of injunctions has obstructed its progress. But the intervention
of the High Court alone is not enough for them; there has
been a sharp fall in their morale due to the intensification of the
class struggle of the rural poor through _Operation Barga_. In despair
they have resorted to retaliatory actions against the recorded
_bargadars_ and the officials engaged in the recording operations. It
is reported that at least in 17 places the officials have been manhandled
by the henchmen of the landowners. Besides, _bargadars_
who came forward to record their names are subjected to social
harassment in the form of financial sanction and implicating them
in false criminal cases. More than 80 persons have been murdered,
and most of the victims are workers and supporters of the Communist
Party of India (Marxist).

# Allegations against _Operation Barga_

Let us now examine some of the allegations currently being
made against _Operation Barga_. It is alleged that a plot already
under cultivation by a genuine record-holder is often registered in
the name of some other person.[^/6] This allegation is not confirmed
by the experience of those who have intimate knowledge of the
recording operations. The West Bengal Land Reforms (Amendment)
Act, 1977, says that "a person lawfully cultivating any
land belonging to another person shall be presumed to be a _bargadar_
in respect of such land if such person is not a member of
the family of the other person whose land he cultivates" and
the "burden of proving that the person is not a _bargadar_ shall
lie on the person who alleges that the person cultivating the
land is not a _bargadar_ in respect of such land." Prior to the
amendment of the Act in 1977, it was the responsibility of the
_bargadar_ to prove that he was a _bargadar_ under the owner. Now the
onus is on the person who raises an objection.

_Operation Barga_ strictly adheres to this principle. After
holding the evening meeting of the _bargadars_ in each area, applications
are collected from them for recording their names, particulars
of which are displayed in the locality for the information of the
interested parties to enable them to file objections, if any. Field
enquiry is thereafter undertaken by the squad officials and the
names of the applicants who are found to be genuine _bargadars_ are
recorded. _Barga_ certificates are then issued to them. The wide
publicity which precedes _barga_ recording leaves little scope for
recording the name of a person who is not a genuine _bargadar_.
Recording of more than one person for the same plot of land is
also out of the question as there is no provision in the Land Reforms
Act for multiple recording.

There is another serious allegation.[^/7] Landlords in the irrigated
zones generally grow _boro_ (second) crop besides the traditional
_aman_ crop, and employ different sharecroppers for the two crops.
Now both the sharecroppers have the legitimate claim for the
registration of their names as _bargadars_. But many of them, as the
allegation goes, have been deprived of the sharecropping right on
the lands where they had worked as sharecroppers the prvious year
either in the _aman_ season or in the _boro_ season. As a result in-fights
have started among them over the sharecropping right. The infights
have already led to a number of clashes which have often
taken a political colour. If there have been really some clashes it
is hardly believable that they have taken place over the issue of
sharecropping rights. Since more than one sharecropper cannot
be recorded for the same plot of land, it has been the usual practice
to record the name of that person who works as a sharecropper
in the _aman_ season. If another person works on the same land in
the _boro_ season his name is not recorded. This practice brings
about a uniformity in recording and there is nothing wrong in it.
If a person working as a sharecropper on a plot of land in the
_boro_ season challenges the right of the sharecropper working on
the same plot of land in the _aman_ season, he certainly does this
under the instigation of vested interests.

Top officials of the land reforms department are of the
firm opinion that the allegations heard against _Operation Barga_
are false. Of course, violation of the regulations which govern
_Operation Barga_ cannot be ruled out when lakhs of interested
persons are involved. As the information goes, such attempts were
made in a small number of cases but the minister in charge of the
land reforms department immediately intervened and set the things
right. The huge task involved in _Operation Barga_ also leaves ample
scope for genuine mistakes. But _Operation Barga_ proceedings are
followed by four other stages of work: _Khanapuri-Bujharat_ (physical
verification), attestation, draft publication and final publication of
the records. If there is a genuine mistake or violation of regulations
in _Operation Barga_ proceedings, it can be pointed out or
challenged by the interested person at any subsequent stage of
work. In fact many genuine mistakes in the proceedings have
been corrected as and when pointed out.

# Promotion of Economic Interests

Some people deliberately make an attempt to create confusion
about the objective of _Operation Barga_ by pointing out that
it has failed to bring about any definite change in the economiccondition
of the downtrodden.[^/8] They conceal the fact that Operation
_Barga_ was conceived as a crash programme for recording of
_bargadars_ within a specified time frame and not as a measure for
bringing about any definite change in the economic condition of
the _bargadars_. The Left Front government has attached utmost
importance and urgency to the recording of the _bargadars_ for two
reasons: 1) once a _bargadar_ is recorded and he is given a certificate
it becomes more difficult for the landowner to evict him than an
unrecorded bagadar; 2) the _barga_ certificate entitles him to financial
assistance from institutional sources. Protection against eviction is
of vital importance to a _bargadar_ but it has a very limited scope for
promoting his economic interests. After recording, he would
probably get his due share of the produce more easily as there
would be behind him the organized strength of _bargadars_ of his
locality. _Operation Barga_ cannot bring about any other change in
his economic condition. Again, financial assistance from institutional
sources, to which he becomes entitled by the _barga_ certificate,
would not come to him directly through _Operation Barga_.

With a view to promoting the economic interest of poor
peasants the state government has already started a separate
programme.[^/9] During the _kharif_ season of 1978 a pilot scheme was
initiated by the government with the help of five public sector
banks and a cooperative bank to provide agricultural credit to
recorded _bargadars_ and assignees of vested land in 23 selected clusters
in 12 districts. The experiment was, by and large, successful.
In 1979, 11 banks were involved in the scheme to give loans to
79,837 sharecroppers and assignees of vested lands. Under this
scheme, credit is made available to the sharecroppers on the basis
of _barga_ certificates. The assignees of vested lands get the loan on
the basis of _pattas_ (entitlement deeds) issued by the settlement
department. The rate of interest charged for this credit is either
zero or nominal. With the help of _gram panchayat_ all formalities for
providing the credit are completed as quickly as possible and
credit is supplied well ahead of the agricultural season. Instead of
paying the entire loan in cash, a portion is paid in seeds and fertilizers
depending on the requirement of the _bargadars_ so that there
is no misuse of the loan.

The recipients of agricultural loans benefit in two ways: 1)
the perpetual dependence on the moneylenders is reduced to some
extent and 2) they are encouraged to increase production on the
lands they cultivate. But agricultural credit for a single crop season
cannot bring about any definite improvement of their economic
condition. If they are to be made free from the perpetual indebtedness
to the moneylenders, the credit should be recycled for a few
years.

Two psychological factors have constrained a successful
implementation of the financing scheme. The first factor is an
institutional bias, reflected in certain mental reservations amongst a
category of banks' managerial staff about the viability or even the
desirability of financing hitherto "non-bankable entities" like sharecroppers,
assignees of vested lands and real marginal farmers.[^/10]
The second factor is the reluctance on the part of a large number
of _bargadars_ and assignees of vested lands to come forward to
take institutional loan to which they do not have an easy access.
They do not feel assured that the financing scheme will be recycled
from year to year. Moreover, the institutional loan, once taken,
will antagonize the village moneylenders and their easy access to
this source of financial help in times of need will be lost.

Easy availability of institutional credit for the poor _bargadars_
and small allottees of vested lands has been rendered difficult
by the first factor. The second factor seems to have been largely
responsible for the failure to bring a large section of the target
group under the scheme. As the report goes, about 60,000 _bargadars_
and small allottees of vested lands have taken agricultural
loan.

In the coming crop seasons the government will have to
take necessary steps to increase the coverage of the financing programme
in much wider areas with the ultimate aim of covering all
the poor _bargadars_ and small allottees of vested lands in the state.
But even a successful implementation of this programme cannot
bring about any radical change in the rural economy. The economic
gains from the institutional credit will not be substantial to
enable the poor _bargadars_ and other recipients of the loan to snap
their economic links with the local moneylenders within a short
period. But the financing programme has another useful purpose
to serve. It will begin the process of containing the usurious
exploiters who very often happen to be the landlords and _jotedars_.
The organized movement of _bargadars_ has gained momentum
under the impact of _Operation Barga_ as a result of which the landlords
and _jotedars_ have been losing their grip on the rural society.
The cumulative effect of the twin programmes will be to expedite
the process of polarization of the rural people in two camps of
exploiters and exploited, and thus prepare the ground for an allout
attack on the feudal and semi-feudal agrarian relations prevailing
in the state.

[^/1]: _Bargadar_ means sharecropper. A _bargadar_ has been defined in the West Bengal Land
Reforms Act, 1955, as a person who under the system generally known as adhi, _barga_
or _bhag_ cultivates the land of another person on condition of delivering a share of
the produce of such land to that person and includes a person who under the system
generally known as _kishani_ cultivates the land of another person on condition of
receiving a share of the produce of such land from that person.

[^/2]: Reorientation Camp at Halusai Polba, Dist Hooghly, May 18, 1978 to May 20,
1978, document prepared by the Directorate of Land Records and Surveys, Government
of West Bengal.

[^/3]: _Mouza_ is the lowest unit of revenue administration, comprising one or more villages.

[^/4]: Board of Revenue, West Bengal, Workshop on Land Reforms, June 23--24, 1978.

[^/5]: These figures were given by the Director of Land Records and Surveys, Government
of West Bengal.

[^/6]:
Asim Mukhopadhyay, "_Operation Barga_", _Economic and Political Weekly_, Vol XIV,
No 37, September 15, 1979, pp 1566--1567.

[^/7]: _Ibid._

[^/8]: _Ibid._

[^/9]: Board of Revenue, West Bengal, Workshop of Land Reforms, June 23--24, 1978
and Workshop on Land Reforms (II), May 4--5, 1979.

[^/10]: Government of West Bengal, _Bank Loan and West Bengal_, statistical report prepared
by combined statistical cell of the Board of Revenue and Land Utilisation and
Reforms, and Land and Land Revenue Department.

[^/11]: Debabrata Bandyopadhyay, "Operation Barga and Land Reforms", in _From
Tebhaga to Operation Barga_ (in Bengali), Board of Revenue, West Bengal,
1979, p 31.
