# POWER ACCOUNTABILITY AND LAW

Even a bare review of the general principles of administrative law in India is a daunting exercise. This is not just because the law is developing as a series of _ad hoc_ judicial responses to the problems of structuring and confining administrative power and discretion. What really makes the exercise daunting is that the struggle to control excesses of power and discretion in India goes beyond instant outcomes and general trends in legal doctrines. It rather extends to the task of imbuing the holders of public power and authority with a spirit of legality and fairness through judicial insistence on accountability. It is doubtful whether courts anywhere have been powerful instrumentalities of generating an ethos of legality in the exercise of public power unless they are aided by an overall political order maximizing the value of accountability. In India, the lack of a stable two-party system, the failure to create appropriate mechanisms---such as the ombudsman or a system of tribunals---has exposed the courts to the burden, not just of rectifying everyday excesses of administrative power, but also of creating and sustaining an ethos of legality and fair play in the use of public power. To understand whether this could ever happen through the judicial process is as important as it is to understand how the excesses of power are episodically combated through judicial review. Traditional writing on administrative law concentrates almost wholly on the second aspect. We endeavour to look at both these aspects in a general account of administrative law developments in India.[^1]

Another chapter in this volume deals with the evolution of concepts and techniques by which the courts in India have, through constant reinterpretation of judicial powers under the Constitution, managed the exercise and excesses of administrative power.[^2] In this chapter, we try to deal only with the evolution of some specific principles and doctrines of fairness, rather than with the processes or problems of activation of remedy structures for actual relief.

[^1]: I rely here on the following principal treatises on administrative law in India: MP. Jain and S.N. Jain, Principles of Administrative Law, 1973, 3rd edn., Tripathi; M.C.J. Kagzi, The Indian Administrative Law, 1973, 3rd edn., Metropolitan; S.P. Sathe, Administrative Law, 1974, 2nd edn., Tripathi; lamented A.T. Markose's Judicial Control of Administrative Action in India, 1956, Madras Law Journal, hailed as the first work of its kind in the common law world, and, the Indian Law Institute's Cases and Materials on Administrative Law in India, 1966, Tripathi present worthwhile perspectives on the evolution of administrative law in India. A comparative survey is provided by M.A. Fazal, Judicial Control of Administrative Action in India and Pakistan, 1969, Oxford. All these works will be hereafter cited by the author. For contemporaneous accounts of developments in this area, consult the Annual Survey of Indian Law, Indian Law Institute and contributions to the Journal of the Indian Law Institute, hereafter referred to respectively as A.S.I.L. and J.I.L.I.

[^2]: _See_ the contribution by D.K. Singh to this volume.
