# DISCRETION

With very wide powers of delegated legislation also marches conferral of vast discretionary powers in the administration. Administration does not merely have the rule-making power; it has also the power, through subordinate, legislation, to confer further discretionary power upon itself through such rule-making. It is true that often the legislature itself provides for wide discretion for specific authorities. But it is the former method of creating and extending discretion which has come oftener before the Indian courts.

The courts have, however, almost consistently, repelled challenges to conferral of vast, and even unbridled, discretionary powers on the administration. These challenges have usually been made on the ground that such conferral violates either the provision of "equality before the law" guaranteed by Article 14 or reasonableness of restrictions on the seven freedoms guaranteed by Article 19 or the residuary "rights" of detenues articulated by Article 22 of the Constitution.[^36] As with the challenges to the plea of excessive delegation, the Indian courts have, by and large, found that the conferral of vast discretionary powers to be usually accompanied by statement of policy or guidance, whether in its preamble or general purposes. No precise delineation of policy or guidance is usually insisted upon; even the most general indications are held sufficient.[^37]

This is not to say that Indian courts have never invalidated what appeared to them to be genuinely arbitrary conferral of discretionary power. But they have done so only where the arbitrariness of the conferral is writ large on the face of the provision. For example, when a licensing authority was given power in absolute terms to grant, revoke or suspend a licence, without any rules to guide it in exercise of the discretion, without any reviewing authority and without any policy which the court could gather from tho statutory text, the Supreme Court invalidated the provision.[^38] Similarly the discretionary power given to an authority to declare an association unlawful on its subjective satisfaction and precluding judicial review of the action through the substitute device of advisory board review was held to be a violation of the fundamental right to form associations under Article 19 (1) (C) and (d).[^39] Where a Commissioner of Police was authorized to give permission for processions in public places and the permission was mandatory on the processionists, the unfettered power to refuse permission without procedural safeguards and scope for review was held bad against the guaranteed right to assemble under Article 19 (1) (b).[^40]

But as against these, there are a very large number of instances where discretionary powers conferred in wide terms have been sustained. Very often, the general objective and policy of the statute are considered sufficient. The very wide governmental power of referring industrial disputes for labour adjudication vested with the State by the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947, has been sustained by the court on the ground that the nature of disputes is very varied and reference to industrial adjudicatory bodies by the government must be left to its "best discretion"; no plea of violation of Article 14 guarantee could thus be raised in this kind of situation as no reasonable classification is deemed possible here.[^41] In the area of agrarian reforms, the power of the State Governments to abolish at its discretion any one estate or group of them,[^42] or to protect certain classes of tenants against ejectment[^43] were held valid as being in pursuit of the directive principles of state policy and on the ground that certain degree of discretion was necessary and justified in situations. Even the power to transfer of tax cases from one jurisdiction to another, without any duty to record reasons and without any other procedural safeguards, was considered justifiably conferred on the ground of administrative convenience.[^44] So has been the power given to the executive to refer certain cases to special'(as against normal criminal) courts established by the statute.[^45]

Even when courts have found that the guidance or policy enunciated in the statute conferring discretionary powers (or delegated legislation) is too wide, the availability of procedural safeguards is held to be sufficient safeguard against abuse of power. Duty to record reasons or provide a hearing or some kind of review of the initial decision have been, singly and conjointly, pressed in aid of holding valid such wide charters of discretionary powers.[^46] It has been rightly said that the insistence on statement of policy (discovered even in the preambulatory recitals by courts) has led to a large scale validation of wide conferrals of discretionary powers and the "standard accepted as sufficient has been so general and vague that it is doubtful whether it serves any useful purpose by way of controlling administrative discretion".[^47] Such control that exists testifies to the trend towards the "preferred freedoms" approach. As regards the fundamental rights to speech and association (as against the rights to movement" and "residence") the "judiciary has insisted on more substantial safeguards". In matters of price-fixing and licensing affecting trade and property courts have consistently sanctioned wide discretionary powers. But the "safeguards" are not in the long run, all that substantial, either.[^48] On the other hand, one finds much greater judicial activity on the question of the actual exercise of discretionary power by the administration. Courts have insisted that the exercise of discretionary powers should be in accordance with the law. For this purpose, exercise of power in a mala fide manner or for an "improper" purpose or on the bases of exclusion of relevant consideration or inclusion of irrelevant ones, or "unreasonable" or "colourable" exercise of power cannot be considered as actions under the law. For, clearly such actions cannot be ever said to be authorized by the statute. Each of these and related heads of abuse of power have been tolerably clearly established in Indian administrative jurisprudence, and methods have been found to ascertain the facts on the basis of which discretionary power has been exercised in each litigious situation. We will turn to these details in a little while.

But before we do so we ought to stress that such judicial invigilation over the exercise of power as occurs is held within the bound of the self-denying ordinance that courts will not examine the merits of administrative decisions.[^49] They will not presume to decide the policy alternatives available to the holders and exercisers of discretionary powers. As is frequently said by courts whenever exercise of administrative power is subject to the subjective satisfaction of the authority, they will not substitute their own satisfaction. At the very most, they would quash an administrative action in contravention of the law. But they would not, ordinarily, "direct the authority to act in a particular manner".[^50]

We now review, briefly, the categories of abuse of discretion and judicial responses to it. The first and the least used category is provided by mala fides, in the strict sense of personal animosity or bad faith on the part of the decision-maker against the aggrieved individual. Clearly, an action mala fide is outside the purposes and powers of the statute and therefore ultra vires. But an action may ex facie be intra vires and yet be vitiated by mala fides, as when the order for dismissal, upon disciplinary action, by government may be intra vires and yet be actuated by mala fides in the strict or limited sense. There have been very few cases in which the charge of mala fides has been sustained; interestingly some of these involved either the Chief Ministers of the State[^51] or high police officials.[^52] The paucity of cases does not indicate that in India mala fides administrative action is rare. Rather, it is indicative of the fact that the judicially evolved standards for the burden of proof for establishing mala fides are unusually stringent. The burden is on the individual making the allegation to prove it. The individual has to prove the mala fides motive of the official. Direct evidence is rarely available. The second order evidence has, however, to be such as to establish a "reasonable and inescapable inference"[^53] of mala fides. Such inference can, and has been, easily drawn when there is failure to file affidavit in response to the charges; but otherwise a pattern of behaviour has to be demonstrated, a pattern both of public utterances and a course of events. The constricting rule of direct evidence can be countered by reliance on the doctrine of judicial notice; but this rarely takes place, even in calamitous situations. In the 1975--77 emergency, the Court could have taken judicial notice of the fact that a number of actual detentions were mala fides[^54] but it kept open the possibility only at a notional level.

The second category of judicial control is provided by the doctrine of "improper purpose". This category is hard to define but available case law, miniscule though it is, suggests that this plea will vitiate administrative action when it can be shown that the authority has acted to serve public purposes outside the statute. The purposes sought to be served are, in contrast to mala fide actions, public purposes but they are not within the regime of purposes sanctioned by the statute under which action is purported to be taken.[^55]

A related category is that of acting on "irrelevant considerations". Extraneous or irrelevant considerations have been held to vitiate exercises of discretionary authority. For example, the refusal by a government to refer an industrial dispute for labour adjudication, on the ground that the workers had resorted to a "go slow" strike was held to be a punitive denial not within the range of relevant considerations authorized by the law.[^56] Similarly, the power to acquire land "needed for construction of a work. ... likely to prove useful to the public" under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, was not permitted to be used to acquire land so that the government could in turn give it to a private company for construction of parts for textile machinery. The court held that the land acquired for public purpose must be directly useful to the public and not indirectly through the future work of some other agency. Such was not the authorization of the Act; consequently, the governmental action was vitiated.[^57] In preventive detention cases, courts have quite frequently, and strictly, applied the doctrine of acting on irrelevant considerations.[^58] It is in this latter area that the courts have taken a much stricter view of the administrative action and struck down orders of detention which proceeded on mixed considerations, that is, orders based on relevant as well as irrelevant grounds. The courts have held that even one irrelevant ground for detention is enough to negate other quite relevant grounds for ordering detention under relevant statutes because it is impossible to disengage grounds predominating the decisional outcome by the concerned authorities.[^59] The richness of what has been called "detention jurisprudence" testifies to how effective judicial control over administrative action could really be.[^60] But outside this arena, courts have been reluctant to extend the doctrine of irrelevant and mixed considerations.[^61]

Just as introduction of irrelevant considerations may vitiate exercise of discretionary power, so may leaving out relevant considerations expose discretionary action to judicial invalidation. Obviously, the plea that the authority has been inadvertent to a relevant consideration is not going to be an easy one to sustain; but in a few cases the plea has succeeded.[^62]

A fourth category for judicial control is provided by the language of reasonableness in the exercise of administrative discretion. The implicit idea is that the authority must act reasonably. In a sense, this cannot be a separate and additional requirement to the grounds already mentioned; for, the doctrines of mala fides, irrelevant and mixed considerations, and others, constitute an emanation from the principles of reasonableness. So it is doubtful whether a plea of unreasonable exercise of power can be raised simpliciter, on its own terms, outside the constitutional and statutory contexts which prescribe these requirements for the reasonable exercise of power. Articles 14 and 19, both fundamental rights provisions, so provide; many statutes also embody a standard of reasonableness. In such contexts, it is open for courts to examine whether the standard of reasonableness, as construed by it from time to time, has been met. Indian courts have held, after some initial hesitation,[^63] that a law may be valid against the test of fundamental rights and yet a discretionary exercise of power may be invalid, being unreasonable.

Several statutes provide for subjective discretion of authorities by phrases such as reasonable belief" or "satisfaction" or "in the opinion of the authority" as a ground of action. In such situations, courts have to determine whether or not to accept the recital of statutory grounds in the order as sufficient to validate the administrative action (which can then only be open to attack on grounds other than reasonableness such as so far enumerated). In a landmark decision in 1967, the Supreme Court by a thin majority asserted that such recital would not be considered adequate for the purpose of judicial scrutiny. The case concerned appointment of investigators under Section 273 (b) of the Indian Companies Act, 1956. This provision empowered appointment of investigators by the Central government "if in the opinion of the government there were circumstances suggesting that: (i) the business of the company was being conducted with an intent to defraud its creditors, members or any other persons; (ii) the persons concerned with the formation of the company or its management were guilty of fraud or misconduct towards the company or any of its members and (iii) the members of the company were not given all the information with respect to its affairs. The Central government had delegated the power to so determine, and proceed with the appointment of investigators, if necessary, to the Company Law Board. The majority held that the "circumstances suggesting" any of the three possibilities must objectively exist; this was a prerequisite of formation of "subjective opinion" and the exercise of discretionary power. The satisfaction was thus open to challenge, _inter alia_, on the basis that the grounds given by the government are such that no one can reasonably arrive at subjective satisfaction on their basis so as to justify the exercise of discretionary powers. The minority opinion, fully advertent to earlier rulings of the court, held that the opinion formation was itself a subjective process and was therefore immune to judicial scrutiny unless it disclosed specific grounds for the action or was proved mala fide.[^64]

There is some doubt, however, that the courts will import the requirement of reasonableness as distinct and separate in adjudicating the validity of discretionary action when the statute does not provide any standards of reasonableness or is silent on the issue.

The fifth category, covering various notions, may be grouped under the rubric "abdication of discretion", which may arise in several ways. First, persons invested with discretion may surrender whole or part of their discretion to other authorities; this has been held impermissible.[^65] Second, the persons invested with discretion may, without actually surrendering it in form, exercise it under superior orders. "Acting under dictation" or directions has also been held impermissible, on the ground that the authority concerned must apply its own mind to the decisional situation and that it should not act "mechanically and without due care".[^66] Third, prior determination of rules or policies to be rigidly and uniformly applied to all cases also signifies impermissible exercise of discretion, when the statute provides standards for exercising discretion to be applied case by case. "Generally speaking, an authority entrusted with a discretion must not, by adopting a rule or policy, disable itself from exercising its discretion in individual cases".[^67] Finally, there exist situations, illustrated mostly in the domain of preventive detention, where non-application of mind by the authority was manifest on the order or the circumstances of the case and the action was quashed on that specific ground.[^68]

It would appear that judicial energies have been comparatively exercised more over use of discretionary powers than on the issue of the validity of their conferral by the legislature upon the executive. However, the effectiveness of all the foregoing devices depends on the access to the facts available to the judicial decision-maker. In proceedings involving validity of quasi-judicial action, the requirement of reasons for a decision or a speaking order clearly gives greater access to information on facts and grounds of the decision. In administrative proceedings, however, unless the statute mandates this, there is no requirement to give reasoned orders. The only facts and grounds which the courts have access to are usually to be found in the affidavits filed by the administration. In some cases, the Supreme Court has insisted that the administration must at least disclose to the court the reasons for its action so that it can examine the challenge of the abuse of discretionary powers.[^69] But even so, the courts have no access to all the details, contained in the government records, of the decision-making. They primarily depend on the orders made by the administration and on the affidavits filed. These clearly limit the range of judicial scrutiny. The self-denying ordinance in the matter of going behind the governmental affidavits and reaching out to the actual records thus limits the effectiveness of judicial review over discretionary action. Based though it is on justifiable grounds of institutional comity, this policy stance often frustrates the claims to fairness by the victim of administrative decisions.

Added to this is the problem, from the victim's standpoint, that courts seem to believe that the higher the status of the authority invested with discretionary powers the lesser the prospect of its abuse. This has been the reason usually explicitly preferred in sustaining wide grants of discretionary powers. This attitude proliferates to the exercise of discretionary powers as well. The actions of lesser officials tend to be more closely examined than those of the more highly placed. The Commissioner of Police or the District Magistrate or the Ministry's high officials, we are almost always told by the courts, are unlikely to exercise their discretion injudiciously or arbitrarily.[^70] In a sense, this is a kind of "caste-based", hierarchic view of responsibility, which intangibly tends to affect the determination that discretion has been abused in a specific case when it is vested in a "high" authority.

We thus find that while the courts do not merely sustain wide conferrals of discretionary power, they also disable themselves in a variety of ways from exercising effective supervision over their exercise. They follow self-denying ordinances in matters of the "merits" of the discretionary policies or actions, and in securing greater access to facts and grounds of administrative decisions. The "caste-based" view which associates hierarchic eminence with responsible exercise of powers, despite significant empirical evidence to the contrary, also (as noted) limits the range of effective judicial invigilation. In the circumstances, it is quite accurate to say that judicial review in this area is still only peripheral" and even where it is actually available "it is not easy to get the relief sought ..."[^71]


[^36]: _See_ Jain and Jain, pp. 262--300.

[^37]: _Cf._ Jain and Jain, p. 264; Sathe, pp. 193--202.

[^38]: Dwarka Prasad v. State of U.P., A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 224.

[^39]: State of Madras v. V.G. Row, A.LR. 1952 S.C. 169.

[^40]: Himat Lal v. Police Commissioner, Ahmedabad, AIR. 1971 S.C. 481.

[^41]: Niemla Mills Ltd. v. Second Punjab Tribunal, AIR. 1957 S.C. 329.

[^42]: E.g. Biswamber v. State of Assam, A.I.R. 1954 S.C. 139.

[^43]: E.g. Inder Singh v. State of Rajasthan, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 510.

[^44]: Pannalal Binjraj v. India, A.I.R. 1957 S.C. 397.

[^45]: _See_ the discussion of relevant case law in _In re_ Special Courts Bill, 1978, (1979) 1 S.C.C. 380.

[^46]: Jain and Jain, p. 265.

[^47]: _Ibid._, 298.

[^48]: _Ibid._, pp. 298--300.

[^49]: The leading case here is Arora v. U.P., A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 1230.

[^50]: Jain and Jain, p. 381. But the Supreme Court in State of Kerala v. P. Roshana, A.I.R. 1979 S.C. 765 has boldly departed from this posture and directed affirmative action on the part of university of Calicut to admit thirty students to the medical college. It also directed the two concerned universities to evolve uniform curricula and common examination programme within specified time limits.

[^51]: Rowjee v. Andhra Pradesh, A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 962; Pratap Singh v. Punjab, A.LR. 1964 S.C. 72.

[^52]: C. Sadanandan v. State of Kerala, A.I.R. 1972 S.C. 1004.

[^53]: Note Pratap Singh v. Punjab. A.I.R. 1964 S.C. 72, 84.

[^54]: _See_ Seervai, _op. cit._, _supra_, footnote 6.

[^55]: Jain and Jain, pp. 389--97.

[^56]: _See_ footnote 9, _supra._

[^57]: R.L. Arora v. State of U.P., A.I.R. 1962 S.C. 764: _see also_ Narayan v. State of Maharashtra, A.I.R. 1977 S.C. 183.

[^58]: Jain and Jain, p. 397--99: and _see_ references in footnote 60, _infra._

[^59]: _Ibid._

[^60]: _See_ M.P. Jain, "Judicial Creativity and Preventive Detention in India", (1975), J. of Malayasian & Comp. Law, 261; P.K. Tripathi, "Preventive Detention: the Indian Experience", (1960) 9 Am. J. Comp. L. 219, M.C.J. Kagzi, "Judicial Control of Executive Discretion under Preventive Detention Law: an Indian Experience", (1965) Public Law 30; C.M. Jariwala, "Preventive Detention in India: Experiences and Suggested Reforms" and V.S. Rekhi. Preventive Detention: Need for Substantive Reforms" in R. Dhavan and A. Jacob (eds.) Indian Constitution: Trends and issues, 1978, pp. 203, 216; respectively Tripathi.

[^61]: _See_ the clarification in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Chandra Mohan, A.I.R. 1977 S.C. 2411.

[^62]: Jain and Jain, pp. 400--1.

[^63]: _See_ Dhanraj Mills v. B.K. Kocher, AIR. 1951 Bom. 132.

[^64]: _See_ the landmark decisions in: Burium Chemicals Ltd. v. Company Law Board. AIR. 1967 S.C. 295; Rohtas Industries Ltd. v. S.D. Agarwal, A.I.R. 1969 S.C. 707.

[^65]: The question arose at the constitutional level in Kesavananda Bharati, _supra_, footnote 3, as to whether the new Article 31 C was invalid because it "abdicated" the power to amend the Constitution vested in certain respects with Parliament in favour of State.

[^66]: _See_ Jain and Jain, pp. 410--13.

[^67]: Shri Rama Sugar Industries v. State of A.P., (1974) 1 S.C.C. 534 per Justice Mathew dissenting, p. 547: _see also_ S.P. Sathe, "Discretion and Policy; A Note on Shri Rama Sugar Industries v. State of A.P.," (1974) 16 J.I.L.J. 457

[^68]: _See_ _supra_, footnotes 58 and 60.

[^69]: _See_ _infra_, footnote 107.

[^70]: _See_ e.g., Kishan Chand Arora v. Commissioner of Police, AIR. 1961 S.C. 705; Maneka, _infra_, footnote 87.

[^71]: Jain and Jain, pp. 88--90.
