# Introduction

In his article, _The Jurisprudence of Police Intelligence Files and Arrest_,[^/1] Prof. James
Jacobs discusses the creation by U.S. law enforcement agencies of criminal and quasi-criminal
records for individuals who were detained but ultimately never convicted of
any offence. He examines the manner in which people are put on various intelligence
and investigative databases and points out that these databases are used not only for
subsequent arrests, but also in prosecutorial and judicial decision making. He writes
that it has been argued that information in databases of arrest records is not meant to
inflict punishment, but to increase the likelihood of solving crimes and to efficiently
process criminal cases. He also discusses how the United States Supreme Court has
held that the presumption of innocence is an evidentiary standard and argues that it
would be a blatant violation of the presumption, if guilt is presumed on the basis of a
prior arrest. After analysing reasons for arrests not leading to convictions, Prof.
Jacobs makes a case for sealing intelligence records, prohibiting non-criminal justice
entities from obtaining and/or using such information, and prohibiting employment
discrimination based on information contained in these records.

I was asked by the editors of NLSIR to provide an Indian perspective on the issues
raised in Prof. Jacobs' piece. While many issues are not strictly _in pari materia_, I
believe there are enough points of similarity between the U.S. and Indian practices to
warrant such an engagement. Accordingly, in this paper, I will show how, since
colonial times, the Indian police have been maintaining databases of individuals who
need to be kept under constant surveillance. These databases are much broader in
nature than arrest records. They contain information regarding individuals who the
police believe could "disturb the peace in society" and are "likely to commit crimes."
There are no objective criteria (like an arrest) for placing a person on these databases.
I will show in this paper, how the issues that arise in India are different from those
that arise in the U.S. context, yet are as discriminatory. I begin in Part II by looking
at the nature of police records maintained in colonial India and those currently
maintained by the Indian police; in Part III, I will analyse if, and how, arrest and
surveillance records are used by the police and courts; in Part IV, I will examine the
constitutionality of maintaining and using surveillance and arrest records; and in Part
V, I will examine the implications of continued maintenance of surveillance and arrest
records, especially in the context of the Government of India's plans to maintain
databases such as the National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID) and the Crime and
Criminal Tracking Network System (CCTNS).

[^/1]: James B. Jacobs, _The Jurisprudence of Police Intelligence Files and Arrest Records_, 22(1), NLSI
Rev.135 (2010).

# Arrest Databases: The Long Arm of Colonial Law

There is a common perception about the Indian police that they are unprofessional,
unsystematic, and that their performance is largely deficient.[^/2] One would not expect a
police force which was set up and still works under the archaic Indian Police Act of
1861 to maintain and share information through databases. However, as various cases
decided by the Indian Supreme Court, involving individuals put on police surveillance
lists ('history sheets') show, this is by no means an unknown practice.[^/3] In this part of
the paper, I will examine different types of such databases maintained by the Indian
police in colonial India, highlighting how the practice has continued post-independence
and post the Constitution. I will focus on three categories of persons
over whom the police in colonial times kept a constant watch: first, the so-called
'criminal tribes'; second, the so-called '_goondas_' and thirdly, the so called 'bad
characters.' I will show how these three categories of persons still continue to be
under constant surveillance by the police and highlight the legal issues that come with
such surveillance. To illustrate current practice, I will rely on the Karnataka Police
Manual.[^/4]

## The 'Criminal Tribes'

One of the earliest pieces of legislations enacted by the British in India was the
Criminal Tribes Act of 1871. Sumanta Banerjee points out that this was just two years
after the Habitual Criminal Act was enacted in England, which had the positivist
school of criminology as its normative basis.[^/5] This school believed that people were
genetically pre-disposed to committing crimes. Its main proponent, Cesare Lombroso
based his assessment of people's criminality _inter alia_, by looking at their physical
features.[^/6] This approach was used in England, as well as in continental Europe to
classify certain groups of people, like gypsies, as being genetically criminal and
habitually addicted to crime.[^/7] The same theory was applied in India, where the British
drew up a list of certain Indian communities and branded them as "criminal tribes."[^/8]
These tribes were identified on the basis of their occupations at that point of time, as
well as their past customs and ancestry. The ideology behind the Act can be seen in
the statement of T.V. Stephens, a member of the Viceroy's council, who, while
introducing the Act, stated that the only way to prevent these people from committing
crimes would be to exterminate them.[^/9]

[^/2]: See: _Prakash Singh v. Union of India_, (2006) 8 SCC 1. In paragraphs 8 and 9 of the judgment, the
Supreme Court refers to a letter written by the Union Home Minister to the State Governments, where
he speaks about the public's perception towards the Indian police.

[^/3]: These cases are discussed in detail in Part IV of the paper.

[^/4]: Article 246(3) of the Constitution of India, read with Entry 2, List II, VII Schedule to the Constitution
of India, empowers the States to legislate in matters relating to the police. Consequently, States have
their own Police Acts, under which rules are formulated for day-to-day running of the police. These
rules are generally found in the Police Manuals of the individual states. _See_: Commonwealth Human
Rights Initiative, Police Organisation in India 8 (2008). The Karnataka Police Manual gets its legal
basis from Section 163 of the Karnataka Police Act, 1963.

[^/5]: Sumanta Banerjee, TheWicked City: Crime and Punishment in Colonial Calcutta, 13(2009).

[^/6]: Cesare Lombroso, Criminal Man (Translated by Mary Gibson and Nicole Hahn Rafter) (2006).

[^/7]: Wicked city, p. 13 and 16.

[^/8]: For a description of the procedure to notify a tribe as a "criminal tribe," see: Andrew J. Major, _State
and Criminal Tribes in Colonial Punjab_, 33(3) Modern Asian Studies 657, 668 (July 1999).


Birinder Pal Singh documents the manner in which the 'criminal tribes' were treated
in Punjab.[^/10] He points out how most of them were nomadic groups and did not fit into
the 'civilized' mould that the colonial rulers were familiar with.[^/11] To stop their
nomadic practices, they were forced to stay in certain settlements, given identity cards
which they had to mandatorily carry with them at all times, had to give a roll call
thrice daily and had to inform the police before they moved out of their settlements.
Even when they moved out, they had to give the police details of where they were
going and the purpose for which they were going there.[^/12] Consequently, individuals
who belonged to these tribes were under constant surveillance, even if they had never
committed an offence. The law was amended in 1911 to include measures like taking
fingerprints and methodologically registering these communities.[^/13] Census records of
Punjab indicate the magnitude of the exercise that the British were carrying out. In
1891, there were 10,229 men from eight tribes who were registered as "criminal
tribes." By 1901, the adult population from amongst nine tribes so registered was
recorded at 49,061 individuals. In 1912, the number of males registered had risen to
21,215 (from sixteen tribes) and the total number of individuals registered is
estimated to have been 63,645.[^/14]

As is evident, the Criminal Tribes Act was a racist and a highly discriminatory piece
of legislation. This was anathema in a constitutional democracy. With the
Constitution of India coming into force, it was but natural that the Act ought to have
been immediately repealed. However, this did not happen till 1952, when the Act was
repealed and the tribes were 'de-notified.' Singh points out how these 'de-notified'
tribes still celebrate August 31,1952 as their date of independence, rather than August
15,1947.[^/15]

The repeal of this legislation did not however make any difference to the manner in
which these communities were treated by the police. Constant surveillance and
persecution continued. Susan Abraham tells the story of Jalan, a woman whose
husband was regularly picked up and beaten by the police; who was stripped off her
_saree_ because she did not have a cash memo.[^/16] Dilip D'Souza points out how _pardhis_
(a de-notified tribe) are routinely picked up by the police every time there is a crime
in the area and are beaten up in the police station.[^/17] He discusses the case of Pinya
Hari Kale, who was picked up by the police and beaten to the death in the police
station. His wife told the Bombay High Court, how she was not perturbed when he
did not return home that night, because she expected him, as always, to be detained
for the night and then released.[^/18] Viswanathan records police brutality against the denotified
tribes in Tamil Nadu.[^/19]

[^/9]: Wicked city, p. 14.

[^/10]: Birinder Pal Singh: 'Criminal' Tribes of Punjab: A Social-Anthropological Inquiry, xiv-xv (2010).

[^/11]: Birinder, p. xiv.

[^/12]: Birinder, p. xv.

[^/13]: Birinder, p. xv.

[^/14]: Andrew Major, 670--71.

[^/15]: Birinder,p. xvii.

[^/16]: Susan Abraham, _Steal or I'll call you a Thief,: 'Criminal' Tribes of India_, 34 EPW 1751 (1999).

[^/17]: Dilip D' Souza, _De-Notified Tribes: Still 'Criminal?'_ 34 EPW 3578.

I have personally heard stories of persecution as well. In early 2008, I was invited to a
'public hearing' in Bhopal, where the members of the _Pardhi_ community (a denotified
tribe) were narrating stories of their exploitation at the hands of the local
police, to the Superintendent of Police of Bhopal. The group, which consisted mostly
of women and children, narrated stories of how the police suspected them in every
theft that took place in the area; picked their husbands up if they purchased fresh fish
for their family on the suspicion that since they were extremely poor, the fish must
have either been stolen or purchased from stolen money; they were beaten up even if
they walked around a 'respectable' colony, on the ground that they must be loitering
around to steal something. When as part of their rag-picking activities, they found an
item of any value, they were often detained by the police under the belief that they
must have stolen the item. Instead of condemning such action, the police officers
present at the meeting, justified them, saying that the _pardhis_ had a reputation for
committing crimes and that the "local community" demanded that the police take
action against them. The police, in turn, advised the _pardhis_ to change their habits,
and mend their criminal ways. The attitude of the police was not surprising, given the
pervasive nature of stereotyping of the community. For instance, in 1998, the Chief
Minister of Madhya Pradesh, of which Bhopal is the capital, had described the
_Pardhis_ as "ethnically criminal."[^/20] He had lamented how even education had not had
any impact on their "criminal instincts."[^/21]

The prevalence of such stereotyping is not limited to Madhya Pradesh. Another
example of it is found in Rule 1054 (3) of the Karnataka Police Manual, which states:
"History Sheets should be opened for those registered ex-notified tribe members ... for
whom the Superintendent or Sub-Divisional Officer thinks it is advisable to do so on
account of their active criminality."[^/22] This is a separate category in the database,
distinct from records based on past arrests, suspicion, convictions, etc. It is therefore
abundantly clear that surveillance and persecution of the de-notified tribes is still a
reality.

Thus, the 'taint of inherent criminality' continues to shape the interaction of these
tribes with the state apparatus, including the police. This was also taken note of by the
Delhi High Court in the _Naz Foundation_ case, where it noted that the "... attachment of
criminality to the _hijra_ community still continue\[d\]" after repealing of the Criminal
Tribes Act.[^/23] The United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination expressing its concern in 2007 that tribes which were listed under the
Criminal Tribes Act, were still being stigmatized in India using the Habitual
Offenders Act, 1952 (sic).[^/24] It recommended to India that it partly repeal the Habitual
Offenders Act (sic) to ensure that these tribes were removed from the list under that
Act (sic).[^/25] The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) had in its annual report
of 1999--2000 also taken note of atrocities against the de-notified and nomadic tribes
and had made various recommendations to tackle this issue.[^/26]

[^/18]: D'Souza, 3578.

[^/19]: S.Viswanathan, Suspects Forever, The Frontline, Vol. 19, No. 12, June 8--21, 2002. Available at:
[https://frontline.thehindu.com/other/article30245103.ece](https://web.archive.org/web/20220125101758/https://frontline.thehindu.com/other/article30245103.ece) (Visited on October 27, 2010)

[^/20]: Dilip D'Souza, _De-Notified Tribes: Still 'Criminal'?_ 34 EPW 3577 (1999).

[^/21]: D'Souza, 3577.

[^/22]: Rule 1054(3).

[^/23]: _Naz Foundation v. State (NCT of Delhi)_, 2010 Cri.L.J. 94,

[^/24]: CERD/C/IND/CO/19, May 5 2007. Available at:
[www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cerd/docs/CERD.C.IND.CO.19.doc](https://web.archive.org/web/20200923013111/https://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cerd/docs/CERD.C.IND.CO.19.doc) - 2007--10--22 (Visited on October
27, 2010)


## '_Goondas_'

Another group of individuals that also faced constant surveillance at the hands of the
colonial police were the so-called "_goondas_." The word "_goonda_" is reported to have
been first used in the Bengal _Goonda_ Act of 1926, where a "_goonda_" was defined to
include a "hooligan or other rough."[^/27] The Act required the police to maintain files of
_goondas_ in their jurisdictions. These _goondas_ included people with prior convictions,
people suspected of committing offences, and also included political activists.[^/28] Other
states had '_Goonda_ Acts' as well, which empowered the executive to extern _goondas_,
by following a quasi-judicial procedure, with nearly no due process protections.[^/29]
Dilip Basu argues that the British attempted to portray an image of a _goonda_ as an
invisible and peripheral entity, who was expendable, undesirable and not worth
protecting.[^/30] Suranjan Das argues, importantly from the point of view of this paper,
that the same perception continues with the police in present-day India.[^/31]
Interestingly, the Preventive Detention Act of 1950, in its initial years, was
predominantly used to detain _goondas_ and other "bad characters."[^/32]

If we were to look at current practice, the Karnataka Police Manual provides for
maintaining a confidential "Register of Rowdies."[^/33] Rule 1059(1) states "a rowdy
may be defined as a _goonda_ and includes a hooligan, rough, vagabond or any person
who is dangerous to the public peace or tranquillity."[^/34] The latter half of the definition
is vague enough to include within its scope a wide variety of individuals. The Manual
also provides for including in the Register, names of "novices, who are budding
_goondas_."[^/35] The "safeguard" provided is that the Superintendent of Police or the SubDivisional
Officer needs to approve the entry of the name of a person into this
"Register of Rowdies." The Manual also states that if a person has a "very bad
reputation" as a bully, that person's name may be included in the Register after a
thorough enquiry.[^/36] Once a person's name has been included in the Register, it
provides for maintaining a "running history" of that person and his/her activities.[^/37]
The Manual also requires police officers at the station to check on daily basis,
whether the entries as regards a "rowdy" in the Station House Diary have also been
entered in the "Register of Rowdies." It also mandates sharing of information between
police stations regarding "non-resident rowdies" or "resident rowdies"[^/38] entering into
their respective jurisdictions.[^/39] In terms of surveillance, the Manual states that the
Station House Officer should show recent photographs of "rowdies" to his/her
subordinate officers every day during roll call, and instruct them to watch their
movements and record information about them.[^/40]

[^/25]: _Id_. It is pertinent to note that there is no Habitual Offender Act of 1952. After the 'Criminal Tribes'
Act was repealed in 1952, various states enacted legislations to deal with 'habitual offenders.' Most of
these legislations require three convictions over a period of five years, for a person to be designated as
a 'habitual offender.' See for instance: the Karnataka Habitual Offenders Act, 1961, the Kerala
Habitual Offenders Act, 1960, the Goa, Daman and Diu Habitual Offenders Act, 1976. Since in this
paper, I am focussing on individuals who have not been convicted earlier, I will not be discussing these
legislations.

[^/26]: National Human Rights Commission (India), Annual Report 1999--2000, Chap X. Available at:
http://nhrc.nic.in/ar99_00.htm#X (Visited on November 5, 2010).

[^/27]: Lancelot Graham, British India, 16(3) Journal of Comparative Legislation and International Law
,(Third Series), 131, 138.

[^/28]: Suranjan Das, _The _Goondas_: Towards a Reconstruction of the Calcutta Underworld through Police
Records_, 29 (44) Economic and Political Weekly 2877, 2877.

[^/29]: Taylor C. Sherman, State Violence and Punishment in India, 87 (2010).

[^/30]: c.f. Suranjan Das, 2877.

[^/31]: Suranjan Das, 2877.

[^/32]: See: David H. Bayley, _The Indian Experience with Preventive Detention_, 35(2) Pacific Affairs 99,
108 (Summer 1962).

[^/33]: Rule 1059(3).

[^/34]: Rule 1059(1).

[^/35]: Rule 1059(4)(c).


## The 'Bad Characters,' 'Suspicious' Individuals and Suspects:

The third category of persons who were kept under surveillance by the British were
the 'bad characters.' A glimpse of this can be seen in a fascinating account by Das
and Chattopadhyay, of the manner in which police records were compiled and used in
colonial India. They rely on Village Crime Note Books, maintained by the police
station in Gazole in Malda District of West Bengal between 1900 and 1971.[^/41] They
point out how police maintained lists of people they termed "Bad Characters," and
profiled people according to their appearance.[^/42] The "Bad Characters" did not have to
be convicted to make their way into the police list. Mere suspicion or apprehension
that the individual would commit a crime or be an inconvenience to the police was
sufficient to warrant an entry. Every stereotype that the British had sought to reinforce
about people being born criminal was put to practice in making the list. 'Bad
Characters' were described as people with dark complexion, "... strong built, broad
chins, deep-set eyes, broad forehead, short hair, scanty or goatee beard, marks on
face, moustache, blunt nose, white teeth and monkey-face."[^/43] Foot prints were also
taken in some cases. People from the family of a convicted person automatically
found themselves on the list.[^/44] Individuals on these lists were kept under surveillance
to ensure that they did not commit crimes.[^/45] We see some of this stereo-typing
continuing in present-day police practices as well.

The Karnataka Police Manual calls for the maintenance of a "Village Crime
Register," in which the police station is required to maintain a list of all individuals
against whom there is a suspicion of their having committed an offence.[^/46] A serial
number is allotted to that person and if he/she moves from one village to another, the
corresponding police station is required to be informed about the fact that the person
has moved into its jurisdiction.[^/47] The police station is also required to maintain
records of suspects as well as suspicious individuals visiting the village.[^/48] The
Manual reiterates the need to maintain records of unconvicted persons against whom
"reasonable suspicion" exists.[^/49] It provides a "safeguard" in this case stating that the
permission of a superior police officer needs to be taken before adding a person's
name to this list. It also states that the name should be retained on the list only till
"reasonable suspicion" exists.[^/50] In contrast, in cases of convicted persons, whose
names also find place in this "history lists," the Manual states that their names should
be removed ten years from the expiry of their last sentence. It can be done even earlier
if a "superior police officer" authorises it.[^/51]

[^/36]: Rule 1059(7).

[^/37]: Rule 1059 (8).

[^/38]: The classification of "Resident" and "Non Resident" rowdy as the terms indicate, depends on whether
the "rowdy" is resident within the jurisdiction of the police station. There is also a category for
"homeless rowdies."

[^/39]: Rule 1059(11).

[^/40]: Rule 1059(17).

[^/41]: Surjan Das & Basudeb Chattopadhyay, _Rural Crime in Police Perception: A Study of Village Crime
Note Books_, 26(3) Economic and Political Weekly 129, 129 (1991).

[^/42]: Das & Chattopadhyay, p. 133.

[^/43]: Das & Chattopadhyay, 133.

[^/44]: Das & Chattopadhyay, 133.

[^/45]: Das & Chattopadhyay, 133.

[^/46]: Rule 1036.


In terms of surveillance, the Manual states that whenever anyone from the police
station visits the village, police officers should "enquire about" these persons.[^/52] This
should be done atleast once every quarter.[^/53] Rule 1052(1) of the Manual states that
the "History Sheet" should contain the names of all persons permanently or
temporarily resident within the limits of the police station "who are known or are
believe to be [addicted]{.underline} to or aid or abet, the commission of crime,"[^/54] irrespective of
whether they have been convicted or not.[^/55] "Habitual receivers" also find themselves
in this list. The Manual does not specify what "addiction to commission of crime"
means. The language is disturbingly similar to police records maintained of "criminal
tribes" by police in colonial India. It also provides for classification of a person as a
"professional criminal."[^/56] Rule 1062 (1) states that if a first offender belongs to a
family of criminals, he/she should automatically be designated as a "professional
criminal."

Rule 1052(2) is as interesting. It says that entries should be made by the Police
Inspector or any officer subordinate to him/her as regards the activities of "close
watch bad-characters" and "non-close watch bad-characters." If anything of interest
comes up with respect to these "bad characters," a note is required to be immediately
made in the "History Sheet."[^/57] Rule 1063(4) states that on opening a "history sheet"
for a "bad character" for the first time, he/she should be designated as a "close-watch
bad-character."[^/58]

The Manual also has a separate section devoted to suspects. It defines suspects _inter alia_ as people who have not been convicted of a crime, but are believed to be _addicted_
to crime.[^/59] Two "safeguards" are provided: first, that "history sheets" for such persons
can only be opened at the discretion of the Superintendent of Police,[^/60] and second,
such sheets should be opened only for those individuals who are likely to turn into
habitual criminals and hence, need to be watched.[^/61] It however states that the fact that
a "history sheet" has been opened for a suspect, other than an ordinary criminal,
should be kept confidential.[^/62]


[^/47]: _Id_.

[^/48]: Rule 1037.

[^/49]: Rule 1045.

[^/50]: _Id_.

[^/51]: Rule 1049(3).

[^/52]: Rule 1049(4).

[^/53]: _Id_.

[^/54]: Emphasis mine.

[^/55]: Rule 1052(1).

[^/56]: Rule 1062.

[^/57]: Rule 1052(2).

[^/58]: Rule 1063(4).

[^/59]: Rule 1058(1)(b).

[^/60]: Rule 1058(1).


Surveillance and maintenance of "history sheets" does not end if a person shifts from
one state to another. The Manual states that if a "history sheeted bad character" moves
from one state to another, information about that person should be sent to the
Superintendent of the Police of the district to which that person has moved to.[^/63] There
is also provision for a mutual exchange of information between states as well.[^/64]

Hence, as is evident, police maintain a complex web of records on people, based
completely on suspicion. Though this does not appear to be computerised yet,[^/65] there
are manual systems already in place for exchange of information between stations
across the district, state and even across the country.

What is the implication of being on one of these databases? As is evident from the
Karnataka Police Manual, a person who is on one of these surveillance lists is
constantly under supervision. In addition to privacy concerns that it raises, this type of
profiling often leads to selective application of laws against these individuals. Studies
in the United States with respect to racial profiling have clearly exhibited this trend.[^/66]
Similar concerns have been brought before the Indian Supreme Court. For instance in
_Malak Singh_,[^/67] the petitioner complained that after being put on a surveillance list he
was considered a suspect in every case being investigated by the police in that area.
As I have discussed earlier, such selective application of criminal laws is also a
constant reality in the interaction of de-notified tribes and the police. Hence, just on
the basis of suspicion, which is sometimes based on the person's socio-economic
status and caste, a person is presumed guilty by the police and no due process rights
are provided in the entry and removal of one's name from the database. Most of these
cases never reach court and the person continues to be marked out and under
surveillance for the rest of his/her life.

It appears that independence from the British made no difference to the working of
the Indian police, at least with respect to maintenance of surveillance databases. They
continue to work under the Indian Police Act of 1861, the mandate of which appears
to have been to create and run an Orwellian state, to further colonial interests.[^/68] The
same surveillance based system appears to be continuing in India, despite the coming
into force of the Constitution of India in 1950.


[^/61]: Rule 1058(2).

[^/62]: Rule 1058(3).

[^/63]: Rule 1061(1).

[^/64]: Rule 1061(2).

[^/65]: The Crime and Criminal Network Tracking System (CCTNS) aims to computerise these records to
facilitate sharing of data. See Part V for a discussion on this.

[^/66]: See Angela J. Davis, _Benign Neglect of Racism in the Criminal Justice System_, 94 Mich.L.Rev. 1660
(1996); Samuel R. Gross & Debra Livingston, _Racial Profiling under Attack_, 102 Columbia LR 1413
(2002) ; Amber A. Hawk, _The Dangers of Racial Profiling_, 2 Law & Soc'y Rev. UCSB 35 (2002--03),
Al Baker & Ray Rivera, _Thousands of Street Stops by New York Police were Legally Unjustified, a
Study Finds_, The New York Times, October 27, 2010, A 22. Also available at:
[https://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/27/nyregion/27frisk.html](https://web.archive.org/web/20210907073203/https://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/27/nyregion/27frisk.html) (Visited on October 30, 2010)

[^/67]: _Malak Singh v. State of Punjab_, AIR 1981 SC 760.

[^/68]: Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative, Feudal Forces: Democratic Nations 6 (2007).

# Impact of Surveillance and Arrest Records on Subsequent Arrests, Bail and Sentencing

After having looked that types of surveillance databases that exist and are used
regularly by the police, in this part I will examine whether, and if so how, surveillance
and arrest records impact subsequent arrests, bail and sentencing decisions.

## Arrest and Bail

Does the existence of a database of arrest records or the "history sheet" impact a
person's subsequent interaction with the criminal justice system? This is an important
issue that needs consideration. As per the existing legal provision for arrest,[^/69] a police
officer can arrest a person without warrant if a reasonable complaint has been made or
credible information exists as regards his/her having committed a cognizable offence.
Though this provision is widely worded, it has been strictly interpreted to confine its
use to specific situations.[^/70] The more draconian provisions, which are generally used
against "history sheeters" are in Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973
(Cr.P.C.).[^/71]

Various provisions in Chapter VIII empower executive magistrates to require a person
to show cause why he/she should not be ordered to execute a bond with or without
sureties, to ensure that he/she does not indulge in certain activities. First, Section 107
of the Cr.P.C empowers the magistrate to seek execution of a bond for "keeping the
peace." The magistrate may do so on receiving information that the person is likely to
commit a breach of peace or disturb the public tranquillity or that the person is likely
to do any wrongful act that may probably occasion a breach of peace or disturb the
public tranquillity. Second, Sections 109 and 110 authorise magistrates to seek
execution of bonds for good behaviour. This can be done if the magistrate receives
information that a person within the jurisdiction is taking precautions to conceal
his/her presence and that there is reason to believe that the person is doing so with a
view to committing a cognizable offence.[^/72] Such action can also be taken if the
magistrate receives information that a person within his/her jurisdiction is a habitual
offender or is "so desperate and dangerous as to render his being at large without
security, hazardous to the community."[^/73] This being a question of fact, the Cr.P.C.
states that it may be proved by evidence of "general repute or otherwise."[^/74] The
Cr.P.C. provides for an inquiry to be conducted to determine the truth of the
information received by the magistrate.[^/75] This inquiry has to be completed within six
months. However, the person can be detained pending inquiry and upto a maximum
of six months.[^/76] If after the inquiry, a determination is made that the person ought to
give security, and the person fails to give such security, he/she may be detained for a
maximum period of three years.[^/77]


[^/69]: Sections 41(a) and (b), Cr.P.C.

[^/70]: Chapter VIII of the Cr.P.C. deals with "Security for keeping the peace and for good behaviour."

[^/72]: Section 109, Cr.P.C.

[^/73]: Section 110(g), Cr.P.C.

[^/74]: Section 116(4), Cr.P.C.

[^/75]: Section 116(2), Cr.P.C.

[^/76]: Section 116(6), Cr.P.C.

Hence, though prior arrest and/or surveillance records might strictly not be of
relevance in arresting a person, they become crucial when preventive detention is the
issue.[^/78] It is clear from the broad wording of Chapter VIII of the Cr.P.C., that the
determination of whether a person will breach public tranquillity is completely factbased.
With the law expressly stating that general repute is relevant, surveillance
records become important in arriving at a conclusion of whether the person is
"dangerous" or not. An individual designated as a 'bad character,' '_goonda_' or
'rowdy' is more likely to come within the purview of Chapter VIII. This is also borne
out through regular reports of the rounding up and detaining of 'anti-social elements'
by the police before elections, festivals and important political events.[^/79] It also
pertinent to note that there is no question of granting bail to such individuals, since
these situations are not covered by the bail laws.

When it does come to bail in other situations, one of the relevant factors that a court
has to consider is whether the person is likely to re-offend when out on bail.[^/80] To be
able to arrive at a conclusion on this issue, the antecedents of the person are
considered.[^/81] If a person has a prior record of arrest, it can be used as a ground to
oppose bail. However, whether a court will accept prior arrests as indicative that the
person will re-offend when released on bail will depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case.

## Sentencing

The \[Indian\] Criminal Procedure Code of 1973 (Cr.P.C.) clearly demarcates the trial
into two parts --- the guilt determination phase and the sentencing phase. The previous
"bad character" of a person is not relevant in the guilt determination phase in a
criminal proceeding, unless the person leads evidence to show that he/she is of "good
character."[^/82] In such a case, to show evidence of "bad character," the Indian Evidence
Act expressly provides that a prior conviction can be cited.[^/83] However, it is silent on
whether a prior arrest or other intelligence records can be used for this purpose. This
remains a theoretical possibility.


[^/77]: Sections 122(2)&(3), Cr.P.C.

[^/78]: For the manner in which preventive detention is used as a tool to detain "_goondas_," see: R. Rajaram,
_Preventive Detention, A Regular Feature_, _The Hindu_, May 20, 2006. Available at:
[https://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/preventive-detention-a-regular-feature/article3135891.ece](https://web.archive.org/web/20220125101356/https://www.thehindu.com/todays-paper/tp-national/tp-tamilnadu/preventive-detention-a-regular-feature/article3135891.ece) (Visited on October 28, 2010).

[^/79]: See for instance: _Cops Tightening Noose around Anti Social Elements_, The Times of India, October
7, 2010. Available at: [https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/varanasi/Cops-tightening-noose-around-anti-social-elements/articleshow/6708884.cms](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/varanasi/Cops-tightening-noose-around-anti-social-elements/articleshow/6708884.cms) (Visited on November 2, 2010); Ban Orders to Maintain
Peace, _The Hindu_, September 30, 2010. Available at:
[http://www.hindu.com/2010/09/30/stories/2010093059080300.htm](https://web.archive.org/web/20130302114813/http://hindu.com/2010/09/30/stories/2010093059080300.htm) (Visited on November 2, 2010);
_8000 anti-socials arrested ahead of Ayodhya verdict_, _Deccan Herald_, September 27, 2010. Available at: [https://www.deccanherald.com/national/8000-anti-socials-arrested-ahead-of-ayodhya-verdict-in-mp-96722.html](https://web.archive.org/web/20220125095806/https://www.deccanherald.com/national/8000-anti-socials-arrested-ahead-of-ayodhya-verdict-in-mp-96722.html)
(Visited on November 2, 2010); R.Rajaram, Efforts Pay off: Criminals
fall into City Police Dragnet, _The Hindu_, September 4, 2010. Available at:
[http://www.hindu.com/2010/09/04/stories/2010090461360300.htm](https://web.archive.org/web/20110920232921/http://www.hindu.com/2010/09/04/stories/2010090461360300.htm) (Visited on November 2, 2010).

[^/80]: See for instance: _Gudikanti Narasimhalu v. State of Andhra Pradesh_, AIR 1978 SC 429.

[^/81]: Gudikanti Narasimhalu.

[^/82]: Section 54, Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

[^/83]: Explanation 2 to Section 54, Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

Once a person has been convicted for a crime, both the prosecution and the convicted
person are given an opportunity to argue on the issue of sentence.[^/84] The Cr.P.C
provides for limited circumstances in which a prior conviction can be cited before the
court and lays down the procedure for doing so.[^/85] However, it is again silent on
whether prior arrest or other intelligence records can be used for seeking an enhanced
sentence. Courts do appear to be considering such information in sentencing.

In _Gurmukh Singh v. State of Haryana_,[^/86] the Supreme Court ruled that the criminal
background and adverse history of the accused, so also the number of criminal cases
pending against him/her are relevant factors in determining the sentence to be
imposed.[^/87] This was reiterated by the Court in _Jameel v. State of U.P._[^/88] It is also
interesting (and disturbing) to note that the Bombay High Court recently sentenced a
man to death for the rape and murder of a fourteen year old girl, _inter alia_ upon the
consideration that there were two other cases _pending_ against him. This, according to
the Court, brought the case within the "rarest of rare case" doctrine, justifying the
imposition of the death penalty.[^/89] These few cases show that arrest, and other nonconviction
records have an adverse impact on the sentence from the point of the view
of the accused.

Thus we see that not only do surveillance and arrest databases exist, but that the
information that they contain, is used as well, both by the police and the courts.
Moving on, I will now analyse the Supreme Court's jurisprudence on the issue of
whether such the existence and use of these databases violates fundamental rights
guaranteed under the Indian Constitution.

# The Indian Supreme Court and its Jurisprudence on Surveillance

In the previous parts of this paper, I have showed that surveillance databases exist and
are regularly used by the Indian police. I have also shown the effect that these
databases have on individuals placed thereon. In this part of the paper, I will examine
the constitutional issues that arise in this context.

It is evident that classifying a person as "criminal" just on the basis of his/her caste is
a violation of the right to equality enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India
and the right against being discriminated solely on the basis of one's caste, which is
prohibited by Article 15(1) of the Constitution. Hence, classifying certain castes as
being "criminal" and rules in police manuals which call for regular surveillance of
people from these castes, are clearly unconstitutional. Tougher questions have arisen
in the context of surveillance. These are: first, does constant surveillance lead to
invasion of privacy and is such invasion of privacy a violation of a fundamental right?
Second, is constant supervision a violation of the right to life and personal liberty
guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution? Third, does constant supervision violate
the right of a citizen to move freely within the territory of India, guaranteed by Article
19(1)(d) of the Constitution? Fourthly, does an individual have a right to be heard
before his/her name is put on a surveillance list? These are questions that the Supreme
Court has had to grapple with. The Supreme Court has always found it difficult to
adjudicate on the right to privacy, especially in the context of crime prevention. It has
consistently upheld the constitutionality of provisions dealing with surveillance, after
laying down guidelines to ensure that they remain constitutional. I will examine these
cases below. In addition, it is pertinent to ask whether placing a person on a
surveillance database and using that information to take criminal action against that
person, violates the presumption of innocence.


[^/84]: Sections 235(2), 248(2), 254(1), Cr.P.C.

[^/85]: Section 211 (7), Cr.P.C.

[^/86]: 2009 (11) SCALE 688.

[^/87]: _Id_., ¶

[^/88]: 2009 (13) SCALE 578, ¶

[^/89]: _State of Maharashtra v. Shankar Kisanrao Khade_, 2009 Cri L.J. 73 (Bom).


## Supreme Court on Surveillance

One of the first challenges to the constitutionality of surveillance related provisions
arose in _Kharak Singh v. State of U.P._[^/90] The appellant Kharak Singh had been charge-sheeted
for committing dacoity. However, the case was dropped as no evidence was
found against him. However, he alleged that his name had been put on a 'history
sheet' on the basis of this proceeding, and that he had been put on surveillance, which
entailed policemen frequently knocking at his door, entering his house, waking him
up at night (including taking him to the police station at night to report his presence).
He could not travel without informing the police and when he travelled, he was
subjected to surveillance at his destination as well. In a petition before the Supreme
Court, Kharak Singh impuged the constitutionality of Chapter XX of the U.P. Police
Regulations, under which these actions were taken, _inter alia_ for being violative of
Articles 19(1)(d) (freedom of movement) and 21(right to life and personal liberty) of
the Constitution of India. The State argued that its actions did not violate the
fundamental rights of the petitioner. It also argued that it kept a confidential watch on
his movements "in the interests of the general public and for the maintenance of
public order," and therefore even if the Regulations violated fundamental rights of the
petitioner, they were constitutional, since the fell within the reasonable restrictions
provided for in Article 19.[^/91]

In the context of Article 19, the Supreme Court ruled that neither surveillance nor
knocking on a person's door and waking him/her up in the night amounts to a
violation of Article 19(1)(d). The reasoning was that the fact of a person being
watched does not hamper his/her freedom of movement, even if he/she is cognizant of
the surveillance. It ruled that informing a person that he/she is being kept under
surveillance would defeat the very purpose of surveillance.[^/92]

On the other hand, the court agreed that the right to liberty of the individual was
violated, when the police knocked on his door at night to satisfy themselves that he
was at home. The Court held that the right to liberty under Article 21 could be taken
away only by "procedure established by law." Since the regulations were merely
executive orders and were not statutory in nature, they did not meet this criteria;
hence the Court struck it down as unconstitutional.[^/93] Although it was argued, the
majority refused to recognize that the right to privacy was a Fundamental Right
guaranteed by the Constitution, on a finding that the doctrine's acceptance in U.S.
jurisprudence could not be transplanted into India, because of textual differences
between the two constitutions.[^/94]


[^/90]: AIR 1963 SC 1295.

[^/91]: _Id_, ¶

[^/92]: _Id_., ¶

[^/93]: _Id_, ¶

Regulations in _pari materia_ with the ones challenged in _Kharak Singh_ were impugned
in _Gobind v. State of Madhya Pradesh_.[^/95] These Regulations had been framed by the
state of Madhya Pradesh under its Police Act. Here the Court held that since "personal
liberty" was being deprived by procedure established by a validly enacted law, the
Regulations did not fall foul of Article 21.[^/96] On the issue of whether surveillance and
knocking on a person's door as a part of such surveillance violates the right to
privacy, it held that even if the right to personal liberty, free movement throughout the
territory of India and the freedom of speech were to create an independent
fundamental right to privacy, it would not be absolute. The Court ruled that if it were
to recognise the right to privacy as a fundamental right, a law could infringe upon the
right in "compelling state interest."

In the context of Article 19(1)(d), the Court held that even if it were to read the right
to privacy into the said article, the Regulations would be reasonable restrictions, and
would be saved by Article 19(5). It however warned the State that the Regulations
were "verging perilously near unconstitutionality," and advised it to revise them.[^/97]

The next challenge to surveillance arose in _Malak Singh v. State of Punjab_.[^/98] The
petitioners in this case had been added to a surveillance list as a result of various cases
filed against them, allegedly by their political adversaries. They had not been
convicted in any of the cases and had either been discharged or acquitted.[^/99] The
consequence of being on the list was that their photographs were put up with a list of
notorious criminals at the local police station and they were called to the police station
along with others whenever a senior officer visited the station. They were also made
part of various investigations, even if they had nothing to do with the matter.[^/100] The
petitioners did not challenge the constitutionality of the Regulations under which their
names had been put on the list; they sought an opportunity of being heard before they
were put on the list.[^/101]

The Court ruled that surveillance registers and 'history sheets' are maintained for the
purpose of preventing crime. Since these documents are by nature confidential there
was no question of the application of the rule of _audi alteram partem_ in this
context.[^/102] On the issue of the danger of potential misuse of this unbridled power by
the police, the Court ruled that since the responsibility of adding people onto the list
was with the Superintendent of Police, this was enough of a safeguard against abuse.
The Court was thus imposing faith in the higher echelons of the police hierarchy to
prevent abuse. Since the Superintendent of Police heads the police administration in
the district,[^/103] the Court appears to believe that he/she would ensure that his/her
subordinates do not abuse their power. It however noted that in the event of abuse, it
was always open to an aggrieved person to approach a court, which could then look
into the reasons for a person being placed on the list. The aggrieved person
himself/herself had no independent right to seek reasons.[^/104] On the issue of extent of
deprivation of privacy, the Court held that surveillance cannot be of such a nature so
as to "squeeze the fundamental freedoms guaranteed to all citizens; nor can the
surveillance so intrude as to offend the dignity of the individual."[^/105]


[^/94]: ¶

[^/95]: AIR 1975 SC 1378.

[^/96]: _Id_., ¶

[^/97]: ¶

[^/98]: AIR 1981 SC 760.

[^/99]: _Id_., ¶

[^/100]: _Id_., ¶

[^/101]: _Id_., ¶

[^/102]: _Id_., ¶

[^/103]: See: Section 4, Indian Police Act, 1861.


With technology came newer methods of surveillance, one of which was telephone
tapping. The issue of whether telephone tapping violates the right to privacy and
consequently, whether Section 5 of the Telegraph Act, 1885 was unconstitutional,
came up before the Supreme Court in _People's Union for Civil Liberties v. Union of
India_.[^/106] In this case, the Court recognised that the right to privacy is a Fundamental
Right, reading it into Article 21.[^/107] It observed that the right to hold a telephone
conversation in private is a part of the right to privacy. Hence, telephone tapping
would be violative of this right, unless it is carried out according to the procedure
established by law. It further ruled that telephone tapping will contravene Article
19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India, unless it satisfies one of the reasonable
restrictions mentioned in Article 19(2). The Court noted that Section 5(2) of the
Telegraph Act, 1885 stated that telephones could be tapped only if a "public
emergency" arose or if "public safety" required such tapping. The Court believed that
the existence of these conditions "would be apparent to a reasonable person."[^/108] The
Court however noticed that there was no procedure laid down in the statute for
exercising this power and in the absence of such procedure, the law might be rendered
unconstitutional. Since the Central Government had not formulated rules for the
exercise of the power under Section 5(2), the Court laid down procedural safeguards
that ought to be followed before a telephone was tapped. It mandated that the order to
authorise such tapping could be made only by the Home Secretary, and could in no
circumstances be delegated to an officer lesser in rank than a Joint Secretary. The
decision was to be reviewed by a Review Committee, consisting of senior
bureaucrats.[^/109] The Supreme Court believed that if this procedure and the other
guidelines that it laid down in the case were strictly followed, there would be no
misuse and the exercise of power would be just, fair and reasonable, and not arbitrary,
which would make the process constitutional.[^/110] Yet again, the Court is placing faith
in senior officials to ensure that there is no abuse of power.

In _Bhavesh Jayanti Lakhani v. State of Maharashtra_,[^/111] the issue before the Court
was whether the consequences of a red-corner notice issued by INTERPROL
contravened the right to privacy. Through the notice, INTERPOL requested the
Central Bureau of Investigation to keep the petitioner under surveillance and arrest
him when the need arose.[^/112] Referring to its previous decisions on the right, the Court
recognised that the right to privacy had been held to be a Fundamental Right.[^/113] It
observed that mere surveillance would not violate the right to privacy. It noted that in
_Malak Singh_, the impugned regulations had been upheld as constitutional since they
provided for proper procedures for surveillance. In the present case, the Central
Government had not formulated guidelines as regards surveillance in pursuance of
INTERPOL notices.[^/114] Hence the Court recommended to the Ministry of External
Affairs that it ought to formulate such guidelines.[^/115] Thus, the Court yet again ruled
that Regulations authorising surveillance would not contravene Articles 19 and 21 of
the Constitution, if proper procedures were followed.


[^/104]: _Id_., ¶

[^/105]: ¶

[^/106]: AIR 1997 SC 568.

[^/107]: _Id_., ¶

[^/108]: _Id_., ¶

[^/109]: _Id_., ¶

[^/110]: _Id_. _See_ ¶ ... _See also_: State of Maharashtra v. Bharat Shanti Lal Shah, J.T. 2008 (10) 77, where the
Supreme Court held that interception of wire, electronic and oral communication will not violate the
right to privacy because there were sufficient safeguards to prevent their misuse.

[^/111]: (2009) 9 SCC 551.


The jurisprudence of the Supreme Court indicates that the approach of the Court with
respect to surveillance and maintaining of "history sheets" has been minimalist.[^/116] As
we see from the string of cases, starting from _Kharak Singh_ and ending with _Bhavesh
Lakhani_, the Supreme Court holds surveillance to be constitutional on substantive
grounds and merely seeks to ensure that there are procedural safeguards to prevent
misuse. In _Kharak Singh_, the Court advised the Legislature to enact a law, whereas in
_Malak Singh_, it warned the Legislature that the enacted law was "perilously close to
unconstitutionality," and advised it to revise the Regulations. At the same time, it
observed that the right to privacy can be curtailed if "compelling state interests" exist.
In _Gobind_, the Court read non-existent procedural safeguards into the law and also
observed that an individual can always approach a court to safeguard his/her rights. In
observing so, it failed to consider that most people who are placed under surveillance
might not have access to a court. As I have demonstrated earlier, the people placed on
surveillance lists are generally those in the lower socio-economic strata of society;
individuals who have been exploited since colonial times and individuals who in some
situations are not even aware of their rights. Expecting such people to approach a
court to seek reasons as to why they were placed on a surveillance list would be
unrealistic. The Court appears to have been satisfied that it resolved the minor issues
that it had framed for itself, but failed to comprehend the broader implications of its
decision, a classic minimalist approach.

In _P.U.C.L._, the Court continued this approach, by laying down guidelines to ensure
that the impugned law remained constitutional and in _Lakhani_, it advised the
Government to formulate further guidelines. Hence, as long as the guidelines of the
Supreme Court are followed, laws providing for surveillance and consequently,
surveillance databases will not run foul of the Constitution as they are permissible
intrusions into fundamental rights. Under this line of cases therefore it is perfectly
legal for the Indian police to maintain databases of arrest records and put people on
these databases under surveillance, without violating their Fundamental Rights. In this
context, it is also pertinent to note that in other cases on the right to privacy, where the
Court held that the right to privacy can be read into the right to life guaranteed by
Article 21, it has always observed that the right is not absolute. For instance, in _Mr. X
v. Hospital Z_,[^/117] the Court held that the right is subject to "such action as may be
lawfully taken for the prevention of crime or disorder or protection of health or morals
or protection of rights and freedom of others."[^/118]


[^/112]: _Id_., ¶

[^/113]: _Id_., ¶ . It is relevant to note that the Court had recognized the right to privacy as a fundamental right
in R.Rajagopal v. State of Tamil Nadu, (1994) 6 SCC 632 and in State of Maharashtra v. Madhukar
Narayan Mardikar, (1991) 1 SCC 57.

[^/114]: _Id_., ¶

[^/115]: _Id_., ¶

[^/116]: Minimalism is a methodology of judicial decision-making where courts decide on the narrowest
possible grounds sufficient to resolve the issue, leaving the broader issues of principle for the
Legislature or Executive. It also advocates deferring to the other branches of government on the
broader issues that it leaves undecided. For a detailed discussion of the concept of minimalism and the
Indian Supreme Court's minimalist approach in terror-related cases, see: Mrinal Satish & Aparna
Chandra, _Of Maternal State and Minimalist Judiciary: The Indian Supreme Court's Approach to
Terror Related Adjudication_, 21(1) NLSI Rev. 51 (2009).

## Surveillance and the Constitution: Looking beyond constitutional challenges before the Supreme Court

The other constitutional issues that I raised at the beginning of this part have not been
expressly addressed by the Supreme Court, especially in the context of surveillance
and maintenance of databases. It is interesting to apply the Court's jurisprudence with
respect to some of these issues to the current situation and examine whether databases
and contemplated by the Police Manuals are constitutional.

The first issue would be whether police databases violate the right to equality
guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court of India in
_Anwar Ali Sarkar_[^/119] had held that as long as there is an intelligible criteria for making
a distinction between groups of individuals and there is a rational nexus between the
classification and the purpose of the legislation, such classification would be
constitutional. In the context of surveillance databases, an argument can be made that
a distinction is being made between people on the basis of their likelihood to commit
crime. This argument might be rational with regards to maintaining databases of
convicted offenders and treating them differently vis-à-vis individuals who have not
been convicted. However, we have seen how the Karnataka Police Manual advocates
maintain databases of suspects, 'suspicious characters,' 'bad characters,' and 'budding
_goondas_' to name a few categories. An argument can be made that such categorisation
and differential treatment of individuals who have never been convicted of
committing a crime, is unconstitutional, since there is no intelligible differentia
between two sets of people who have not been convicted of committing an offence.
Much of the framing of categories like "bad characters" and "rowdies" on the basis of
familial characteristics and other vague grounds, might also be deemed arbitrary
under the Royappa standard for Article 14.[^/120]

The other set of issues in the context of Article 14 are those raised by Prof. Jacobs in
the U.S. context. Prof. Jacobs points out that individuals who find themselves on
arrest and surveillance databases are likely to be discriminated with respect to housing
and employment. India does not seem to have similar concerns, mainly because of
_Anwar Ali Sarkar_, since it will be unconstitutional for the state to discriminate
between two sets of individuals, who have never been convicted of a crime. Denying
public housing or employment with the government on the ground that a person is on
a surveillance database or has been ever arrested is not likely to pass constitutional
muster. This does not mean that the state does not facilitate such discrimination in


[^/117]: AIR 1999 SC 495.

[^/118]: ¶

[^/119]: _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali Sarkar_, AIR 1952 SC 75.

[^/120]: _E.P. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu_, (1974) 4 SCC 3.

private employment. In light of crimes attributed to domestic servants, police in
various cities have begun maintaining "domestic servant databases." Individuals are
required to register their domestic servants with the nearest police station. The police
station runs a background check to ensure that domestic help has given his/her right
permanent address. It also checks whether the person has any criminal antecedents.
As I have discussed earlier, given the nature of databases maintained by the police, a
prior conviction is not a _sine qua non_ to be certified as a person with criminal
antecedents. In such a circumstance, if the information that the domestic servant has
criminal antecedents is relayed to the employer, it is quite likely that the servant
would lose his/her job.[^/121] Interestingly, the Delhi Police Amendment Bill of 2010
provides for five years of imprisonment if an employer does not register his/her
servant with the police.[^/122]

In addition, while denial of public housing might not be possible, the same cannot be
said of private enterprises. The horizontal application of fundamental rights has not
been recognized by Indian courts. In _Zoroastrian Co-operative Housing Society v.
District Registrar Co-operative Societies_,[^/123] the Supreme Court refused to intervene
where the byelaws of a registered cooperative housing society discriminated against
individuals solely on the ground of religion. The Court refused to apply fundamental
rights as between non-state entities, holding that it was for the Legislature to achieve
the constitutional goal of an equal society.[^/124] Such instances of discrimination based
on religion have also been reported in the media, with a couple of Bollywood
personalities claiming that they could not purchase houses in certain housing cooperative
societies, since they were Muslim.[^/125] Thus, if bye-laws of a housing society
state that shares cannot be sold to anyone who has ever been arrested or to someone
whose is on a surveillance database, as per present law, their action will be valid and a
constitutional challenge will not succeed.

It can also be argued that maintaining and using surveillance databases violates the
presumption of innocence. Article 11(1) of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights and Article 14(2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
state that a person should be presumed to be innocent until proven guilty by a court of
law. The Supreme Court of India has referred to the presumption of innocence as a
facet of fair trial,[^/126] but has not recognised it as a Fundamental Right.[^/127] In _Noor
Aga_,[^/128] the Supreme Court held that the presumption of innocence was a human right,
but not a fundamental right. It held that the presumption cannot be "thrown aside," but
was subject to exceptions.[^/129] I have noted earlier how courts have used surveillance
records as well as the fact that cases were pending against the accused, as an
aggravating factor while sentencing. Using the fact of a pending case against the
accused amounts to a violation of the presumption of innocence, since the person has
not yet been convicted in the pending case by a court of law.


[^/121]: See: [http://www.delhipolice.nic.in/home/servant.htm](https://web.archive.org/web/20210309195119/http://www.delhipolice.nic.in/home/servant.htm) (Visited on November 5, 2010). For media
reports on servant registration, see: Rahul Tripathi, _Now Servants have to give references in
verification_, Available at: [https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Now-servants-have-to-give-references-in-verification-form/articleshow/3115498.cms](https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/Now-servants-have-to-give-references-in-verification-form/articleshow/3115498.cms) (Visited on November 5, 2010); Amrita
_Chaudhary, Firm roped in to quicken servant registration work_, Available at:
[https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/ludhiana/firm-roped-in-to-quicken-servant-registration-work/](https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/ludhiana/firm-roped-in-to-quicken-servant-registration-work/) (Visited on
November 5, 2010). It is interesting to note that the police in Ludhiana chose to outsource this task of
collective sensitive information to a private firm. _See also_: _Servant-Tenant Registration to restart_,
Available at: [http://www.tribuneindia.com/2008/20080420/ldh1.htm](https://web.archive.org/web/20210509124042/https://www.tribuneindia.com/2008/20080420/ldh1.htm) (Visited on November 5, 2010).

[^/122]: See: Section 62A, Delhi Police (Amendment) Bill, 2010. Available at: [http://mha.nic.in/pdfs/DP-AMEND-BIL-1978.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20110104164520/http://mha.nic.in/pdfs/DP-AMEND-BIL-1978.pdf) (Available at November 5, 2010).

[^/123]: (2005) 5 SCC 632.

[^/124]: ¶

[^/125]: See: Emraan Hashmi alleges that he was denied a house as he's Muslim, Available at:
http://www.dnaindia.com/mumbai/report_emraan-hashmi-alleges-he-was-denied-a-house-as-he-s-muslim_1278715 (Visited on November 3, 2010); _Denied house because I am Muslim: Emraan
Hashmi_, Available at: [https://www.outlookindia.com/newswire/story/denied-house-because-im-muslim-emraan-hashmi/663649](https://web.archive.org/web/20211117053556/https://www.outlookindia.com/newswire/story/denied-house-because-im-muslim-emraan-hashmi/663649) (Visited on November 3, 2010);
_Also see_: Anupama Katakam, There is a terrible feeling of Insecurity, _Frontline_, Vol. 25, Issue 19,
September 13--26, 2008. Available at:
[https://frontline.thehindu.com/cover-story/article30197656.ece](https://web.archive.org/web/20220125093500/https://frontline.thehindu.com/cover-story/article30197656.ece) (Visited on November 3, 2010).

# Looking Ahead

Here we deal with The National Grid, Crime and Criminal Tracking Network System and the Unique ID Project: The Future of Surveillance Records and their Implications.

In the previous parts of this paper, I have highlighted the manner in which
surveillance records are maintained and used by Indian police. I have also pointed out
how the Supreme Court of India has held these databases and consequent surveillance
that follows, to be constitutional. I have also shown how the presumption of guilt
follows (no pun intended) a person who is on such a database and have discussed
issues of selective application of the law, as well as the discriminatory nature of these
databases. Having established that the databases violate an individual's fundamental
rights, I will in this part discuss the Government's attempts at strengthening
databases, in the name of national security. I will highlight concerns that arise in the
context of three ventures of the Government of India --- the Unique Identity project,
the National Grid (NATGRID) and the Crime and Criminal Tracking Network
System (CCTNS). I will discuss the implications that these databases might have on
the presumption of innocence, the right to privacy and the right to liberty.

## The Unique Identification (UID) project

There have been various concerns raised about the Government of India's Unique
Identification Project, which seeks to issue identity numbers to every resident of India
for authentication of identity and facilitating the distribution of public benefits. There
have been various critiques of the Government's attempt. Usha Ramanathan, writing
in the _Indian Express_ points out how the UID will lead to "convergence"[^/130] of data in
the hands of various agencies. She points out that individuals give information to
various agencies for services that they need. For instance, information is given to
banks, RTO, the passport office etc. Presently, these institutions do not share their
information with each other, since most of the times these are not relevant. But, once
the data is put together at one place, the RTO might be able to know how many bank
accounts a person has, the passport office will get to know if the person drives a car,
etc. She argues that there is no need for such information to be shared across agencies,
and fears that such information can be misused. Referring to the UID Authority of
India's working paper, she points out how no mention has been made there of national
security concerns and the possibilities of surveillance that the UID might create.[^/131]
She also refers to the Home Minister talking about having a DNA bank,[^/132] and setting
up of NATGRID, using which law-enforcement agencies will be able to access
twenty-one databases at the same time.[^/133] Adding the UID to the mix, Ramanathan
argues, might give inordinate powers to the State.[^/134] Sudhir Krishnaswamy argues
that having a single database which contains personal information of all residents and
then giving access to it to a single institution raises concerns of creating a
"surveillance state."[^/135]


[^/126]: See: _Syed Akbar v. State of Karnataka_, 1979 Cri LJ 1374 (SC).

[^/127]: See: _Noor Aga v. v. State of Punjab_, 2008 (56) BLJR 2254.

[^/128]: _Noor Aga v. State of Punjab_, 2008 (56) BLJR 2254.

[^/129]: _Id_., ¶

[^/130]: Usha Ramanathan, _The Personal is the Personal_, _Indian Express_, Jan 6, 2010, available at:
[https://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/the-personal-is-the-personal/](https://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/the-personal-is-the-personal/) (Visited on October 27, 2010)

In the context of these concerns, it is relevant to examine the National Identification
Authority of India (Draft) Bill, 2010 (NIAI Bill), which sets up a statutory authority to
issue the UID number.[^/136] Section 30(5) of the Bill states that the Authority can
disclose to the Government, information obtained by it from individuals, if such
information is sought for reasons of "national security." This can be done pursuant to
a direction to that effect issued by an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary or
equivalent in the Central Government, with the approval of the Minister incharge.[^/137]
The purpose of the UID, as per the Draft Bill is authentication of identity, rather than
sharing data and information.[^/138] Further, under Section 32, the Authority is required
to maintain details for every request for authentication and the response provided,
which the number holder will have access to as well. Let me first consider whether the
concerns of creating a "surveillance state" are valid or whether as the UIDAI
presently claims, the purpose of the UID is only to authenticate. Let us assume that an
individual desires to open an account in a public-sector bank. She will be asked for
her UID number and on her presenting the same and a photograph, as is required
under the Know Your Client regulations. This will be then sought to be authenticated
with the NIAI database. When such a request is sent, the fact that a person is opening
a bank account is available with the Government. If the person then applies for a
credit card, the same process gets repeated. The UIDAI in its strategy overview
indicates that the Unique ID can be used to authenticate information required for
getting a new mobile connection, a PAN card, a gas connection with Public sector
companies, a passport, a life insurance policy, a credit card, to open a bank account, to
check-in for a flight etc.[^/139] Thus, the NIAI will have information regarding all these
transactions that a person does. Though this might appear benign and it could be
argued that the process for the government to access this information is laborious and
has multiple safeguards, the prospect of such information being available at one place
is in itself a cause for concern. Will this lead to a "surveillance state"? It is premature
to comment on the same until Rules, which state the manner in which data can be
accessed, are formulated under the proposed NIAI Act. Only then can one get a
conclusive answer to this question.

[^/131]: _Id_.

[^/132]: _Id_.

[^/133]: Usha Ramanathan, _Eyeing IDs_, _Indian Express_, May 1, 2010, available at:
[https://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/eyeing-ids/](https://indianexpress.com/article/opinion/columns/eyeing-ids/) (Visited on October 27, 2010).

[^/134]: _Id_. For an interesting analysis of critiques against having National IDs, see: Amitai Etizoni, _How
Patriotic is the Patriot Act?_ 95--128 (2004).

[^/135]: Sudhir Krishnaswamy, _Unique Identity Numbers: The Enabler of Policy Reform?_ Available at:
[http://casi.sas.upenn.edu/iit/krishnaswamy](https://web.archive.org/web/20220125103225/https://casi.sas.upenn.edu/iit/krishnaswamy) (Visited on November 4, 2010).

[^/136]: The draft Bill is available at: [http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media//NIA%20Draft%20Bill.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20180127214906/http://www.prsindia.org/uploads/media//NIA%20Draft%20Bill.pdf)
(Visited on October 10, 2010).

[^/137]: Section 33(b), National Identification Authority of India (Draft) Bill, 2010.

[^/138]: This is also stated in the "UIDAI Strategy Overview." This is available at:
[http://uidai.gov.in/UID_PDF/Front_Page_Articles/Documents/Strategy_Overveiw-001.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20160817110704/https://uidai.gov.in/UID_PDF/Front_Page_Articles/Documents/Strategy_Overveiw-001.pdf) (Visited on
October 31, 2010.)

[^/139]: UIDAI Strategy Overview: Creating a Unique Identity Number for Every Resident in India 29,
UIDAI, April 2010. Available at
[http://uidai.gov.in/images/FrontPageUpdates/tampa/DevelopinganIdentityNumberforEveryIndian.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20130322102034/http://uidai.gov.in/images/FrontPageUpdates/tampa/DevelopinganIdentityNumberforEveryIndian.pdf)
(Visited on November 2, 2010)

## NATGRID & CCTNS

On the other hand, sharing data and information is the objective of the proposed
National Intelligence Grid (NATGRID). The NATGRID proposes to collect data from
twenty one existing databases and make it accessible real time to eleven agencies.[^/140]
The agencies which will have access to the database include the Intelligence Bureau,
the Research and Analysis Wing, the Military Intelligence, the National Investigative
Agency and the National Security Council. It is reported that these agencies will be
hooked up to each other, as also Indian Railways, Air India, the Income Tax
Department, state police departments, banks, insurance companies, telecom service
providers and even market regulators like the Securities and the Exchange Board of
India, which will feed data available with them into the database.[^/141] Visa and
Immigration records, driving licence records, credit card transactions and property
records would also be fed into the database.[^/142]

The other ambitious plan of the Government of India is to create the Crime and
Criminal Tracking Network System (CCTNS). This system will link all police
stations in the country.[^/143] Thus, it can be envisaged that all police stations will have
access to each other's "history" and "rowdy" sheets. Thus, if a person is arrested once
in any part of the country or designated a "bad character," that data will be shared
real-time with all the police stations in the country.

Maintenance of archaic "history sheets" and "rowdy sheets" is an anathema in a
constitutional democracy like India, which is based on the rule of law. A system
which places people on surveillance based on whether the local police believe they
are "bad characters" or based on their caste, familial and social ties is outright
unconstitutional. It is imperative that before creating systems like the NATGRID and
CCTNS, the Government have a re-look at its policy of record-keeping. dispense with
databases of suspects --- which are all based on non-objective and arbitrary factors. As
technology in maintaining databases moves from the nineteenth to the twenty-first
century, it is imperative that policing and mindsets also keep pace and that the
arbitrary classifications of 'bad characters,' 'history sheeters,' 'budding _goondas_,'
'roughs' and 'rowdies' are consigned to the annals of history.

[^/140]: See: Vinay Kumar, _"Big Brother" fears stall Chidambaram Data Plan_, _The Hindu_, February 14, 2010. Available at: [http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/article106301.ece](https://web.archive.org/web/20220125102209/https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/lsquoBig-Brotherrsquo-fears-stall-Chidambaram-data-plan/article16814457.ece) (Visited on October 28, 2010), Sahil Makkar, _CCS Approves Natgrid Plan_, Available at: [https://www.livemint.com/Politics/X8tkIHlWjknTocaY6opfHP/CCS-approves-Natgrid-plan.html](https://web.archive.org/web/20130622114820/http://www.livemint.com/Politics/X8tkIHlWjknTocaY6opfHP/CCS-approves-Natgrid-plan.html)
 (Visited on October 28, 2010).

[^/141]: Sahil Makkar, _CCS Approves Natgrid Plan_, Available at: [https://www.livemint.com/Politics/X8tkIHlWjknTocaY6opfHP/CCS-approves-Natgrid-plan.html](https://web.archive.org/web/20130622114820/http://www.livemint.com/Politics/X8tkIHlWjknTocaY6opfHP/CCS-approves-Natgrid-plan.html) (Visited on October 28, 2010).

[^/142]: Vinay Kumar, _"Big Brother" fears stall Chidambaram Data Plan_, _The Hindu_, February 14, 2010.
Available at: [http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/article106301.ece](https://web.archive.org/web/20220125102209/https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/lsquoBig-Brotherrsquo-fears-stall-Chidambaram-data-plan/article16814457.ece) (Visited on October 28, 2010).

[^/143]: Information on CCTNS is available at: [https://ncrb.gov.in/en/crime-and-criminal-tracking-network-systems-cctns](https://web.archive.org/web/20220110140753/https://ncrb.gov.in/en/crime-and-criminal-tracking-network-systems-cctns) (Visited on October 28, 2010).
