There is currently a great deal of optimism surrounding
worker-owned co-operatives. New initiatives
abound in the United States and in the
austerity-punished countries of the Eurozone,
particularly in the aftermath of the financial
crisis. Inspired by the Occupy and anti-austerity
movements, advocates argue that co-ops
secure employment, give workers control, and
anchor community-based economies. Many
--- academics and social justice activists alike
--- maintain that co-ops promise a more
democratic and just form of capitalism and
even sow the seeds of socialism within capitalist
society. Even unions have started to pay
attention. For example, the United Steel
Workers (USW) signed a memorandum with
Mondragón Corporation in 2009 intended to
explore unionized co-operatives.

Amid the activity and excitement, however,
there was disappointing news. In 2013, Fagor
Electrodomésticos, the home appliance division
and flagship brand of Mondragón
Corporation, declared bankruptcy, and 5,600
jobs were lost. Since co-op supporters worldwide
count Mondragón as the leading model for
worker-owned co-ops, this turn of events registered
far beyond the shuttered factories of
Fagor.

Headquartered in the industrialized Spanish
Basque city for which it is named, Mondragón
is regularly hailed as the most successful
worker-owned enterprise in the world. The first
factory, predecessor of Fagor, opened in the
1950s to produce gas stoves for a domestic market
stimulated by the development policies of
the Spanish state. Today, Mondragón employs
seventy-four thousand people in 257 firms,
including subsidiaries and joint ventures in sixty
counties. Industrial co-ops manufacture everything
from machine tools and commercial
kitchen equipment to automotive parts for a
global market. The mega-supermarket chain
Eroski has more than two thousand outlets
throughout Europe, including ninety super-centers.
The Caja Laboral bank and social security
co-op provide financial services to members
and affiliated businesses, and Mondragón
University offers undergraduate and postgraduate
degrees in engineering, management, education,
and culinary arts.

Mondragón inspires devotion from people
worldwide who seek existing alternatives to
capitalism. Each co-op is fully owned by members
(workers, and managers alike) who invest
as shareholders, there are no outside stockholders.
The co-ops are not unionized; instead,
workers are represented by social councils, and
firm-wide decisions are confirmed by a vote by
the general assembly. Each co-op sends representatives
to the Cooperative Congress, where
system-wide business decisions are made.
Mondragón limits managerial salaries to nine
times that of the lowest paid member; this is an
exceptionally equitable differential compared
with the 2014 average CEO-to-worker pay ratio
of 127:1 in Spain or 331:1 in the United States
(according to the AFL-CIO). Reinvestment is
substantial, and surplus (not designated as
profit) is distributed to members' personal capital
accounts in the Caja Laboral, where they are
held as private savings but made available for
investment within the co-op group. Mondragón
guarantees employment to co-op members, and
during downturns, members preserve jobs by
cutting salaries and increasing their investments,
or by transferring workers between co-ops.
To advocates, these practices manifest the
core co-operative principle that holds labor
sovereign over capital.

Fagor's failure, however, disrupts this familiar
account of Mondragón's achievements, not
only for the bankruptcy, which is singular in the
system's sixty-year history, but also because it
reveals contradictions regarding rank-and-file
workers, working conditions, and labor that are
often overlooked by co-op supporters.
International expansion beginning in the 1990s
created three-tiered labor force at
Mondragón --- _members_ in the Basque country,
_temporary workers_ throughout the Basque
region and Spain, and _wage laborers_ in foreign
subsidiaries. The bankruptcy had dramatically
unequal consequences for these different categories
of workers. Even before they created this
global hierarchy, the co-ops divided the local
labor force in the city of Mondragón itself,
where co-op workers often stood apart from the
struggles that shaped the social and political life
of the city's working class. To assess the co-op
movement's potential, it is useful to examine
problems of work and class in Mondragón and
their implications for how we think about
co-operatives in this conjunctural moment,
when capital provides neither secure jobs nor a
livable wage for countless working people;
anti-capitalist activists establish grassroots co-ops
in many quarters, and cities, non-profits,
banks, and labor unions stimulate worker-owned
businesses, while co-ops compete on a
global market.

# The Impact of Fagor's Bankruptcy

Fagor Electrodomésticos had struggled since
2008, when the financial crisis shocked the
Spanish housing market and the home appliance
sector with it. Fagor was dependent on
housing starts in Spain, and it relied on subsidies
from other Mondragón co-ops to stay
afloat. But in the fall of 2013, with €1.1 billion
in debt, continued losses, and burdensome
international investments --- Fagor had eighteen
factories in nine countries and eleven thousand
employees worldwide before the crisis --- the
Mondragón Central Council cut off funding.

This dealt a blow to the city of Mondragón,
whose population of twenty-five thousand
depended in good measure on Fagor factories
and was already struggling with the repercussions
of capitalist crisis and austerity, as well as
with pay cuts and the loss of temporary contracts
in the co-ops. Co-op members took to the
streets to defend their jobs. They held protest
marches, and at one Fagor site, workers locked
themselves inside in an effort to prevent its closure.
The eruption of protest was unusual, as
Mondragón regulations prohibit strikes over in-house
labor conflicts. Workers in non-co-op
factories came out to show support. Their union
affiliations habituated them to solidarity, and
they understood that despite employment security
for members, the loss of temporary contracts
and the net reduction of co-op jobs were
setbacks for the local working class. The
announcement that some Fagor plants were
bought by corporate competitors (BSH Home
Appliances and Cata & Can group) and would
reopen with dramatically reduced workforces
offered little solace.[^/1]

The 5,600 Fagor workers (who remained
after rounds of downsizing) fell into three categories:
approximately 1,900 members in Fagor
co-ops in Mondragón and nearby Basque towns;
two hundred temporary workers in the Basque
country on short-term contracts, and 3,500 wage
laborers in international subsidiaries[^/2] Of the
members, the majority transferred to other co-ops.
Others took retirement options with
Lagun Aro, Mondragón's pension management
institution; went on unemployment until they
qualified for early retirement (availing themselves
of a new legal provision that allowed them to collect
unemployment payments even though, as
co-op members, they were self-employed); or
opted for buyout or retraining. The jobs and
incomes of temporary workers and subsidiary
employees, in contrast, were not protected. The
fate of all of these people, as well as an account of
the working conditions in other Mondragón subsidiaries,
are as much a part of the Mondragón
story as are the frequently recited co-operative
principles and democratic structures.

# Mondragón's Global Labor Force

Mondragón went global in 1990, in response to
increased international competition that followed
Spain's entry into the European Union.
Now, in a bid to remain competitive and protect
jobs in the Basque country, Mondragón multi-national
co-ops control 100 foreign subsidiaries
and joint ventures, employing approximately
twelve thousand workers, mostly in developing
and post-socialist countries, where wages are
low or markets growing.[^/3] These firms are not
worker-owned and their employees do not have
the rights or privileges of co-op members. Even
in the Basque country and in Spain, co-ops
depend on significant numbers of temporary
workers on short-term contracts. Only about
one-half of Mondragón's businesses are co-operatives
and one-third of its employees are members.[^/4]
A report on the working lives of employees
of co-op subsidiaries is a critical, but too-often-sidelined,
dimension of the Mondragón model.

Economist Anjel Errasti studied eleven
Mondragón subsidiaries in the Kunshan Industrial
Park in China, near Shanghai. (Mondragón has
eight other plants in China.) Errasti compared co-op-owned
factories with conventional multi-nationals
in Kunshan. Most produce auto parts and
are small- to medium-sized, labor-intensive firms
with fifteen to 250 employees. The majority of
assembly workers are women, and machine operators
are men. Pay is equally low in both the
Mondragón-owned and the conventional subsidiaries;
Kunshan workers earn €1.5 per hour compared
with €21 in the Basque country. So, too, are
the hours similarly long and conditions harsh. To
eam overtime pay, workers put in eleven hours,
six days a week, and regularly forego vacations
and holidays. Like their competitors, Mondragón
co-ops invest in China to manufacture labor-intensive
goods cheaply and to be in close proximity
to their clients in emerging markets.[^/5] A
2008 strike over low pay and repression of union
activists at Fagor Mastercook in Wroclaw, Poland
suggest that these conditions are not unique to
China. Wages in Mastercook were barely higher
than the state-mandated minimum.[^/6]

Co-op members voted to pursue an international
strategy to open these firms, and, thus, to
employ low-wage laborers. Hence, we are confronted
with a complicated permutation of a
familiar state of affairs whereby the privilege of
one strata of workers depends upon the exploitation
of another. The history of capital accumulation,
as we know well, is the history of the
making of difference and inequality across
space, racial, gender, skill, etc.). What should
we make of division and inequality along the
lines of employment status and space/nation
when these strategies are deployed by worker-owned
co-operatives?

Mondragón's employment growth to 2007
well outpaced that of Spain overall, and domestic
employment was twice as great in co-ops
with overseas plants than in those without.[^/7] In
the aftermath of the financial crisis, when
unemployment in Spain rose sharply, the city of
Mondragón and its environs fared better, in
good measure because of the co-ops. Job security,
decent pay, and workplace democracy in
the Basque country, therefore, rest upon poorly
paid and insecure wage labor elsewhere.

The system-wide decision-making body, the
Cooperative Congress, passed a policy of
"social expansion" in 2003 to extend participation
and democracy beyond the Basque country.
The policy emphasizes education to develop the
ethos and "culture" of self-management in other
environments. To this end, workers from one
co-op venture in Mexico traveled to Mondragón
headquarters to learn co-operative principles.
There is continued talk of converting subsidiaries
to co-ops, although distinct national legal
frameworks make this difficult; to date, there
has been one such conversion in Galicia, Spain.
A plan is underway to extend membership to
employees in Eroski's retail stores, where
worker-ownership is particularly low.[^/8]

Moreover, Mondragón devised a new category
of _temporary member_, which does not grant
permanent job security but extends rights to vote
and serve on elected bodies, participate in the general
assembly, and receive a share of surplus
(reduced relative to full membership). With a limit
of five years, this status preserves labor flexibility,
but extends some privileges of membership.[^/9]
Mondragón also has a new non-governmental
oryanization (NGO) --- the Mundukide Foundation
--- to encourage solidarity-economy efforts farther
afield, and it is co-signer with USW of the pioneering
memorandum to foster unionized co-ops
in the United States.[^/10]

Still, Mondragón's subsidiaries operate like
standard firms, despite the fact that their aim is
not to maximize profit for stockholders but to
maintain co-op jobs in the Basque country.
Many analysts trust that Mondragón intends to
do right by its non-member employees. Others,
to the contrary, see in Mondragón's international
business strategy confirmation that co-ops
cannot survive in a global capitalist sea:
co-operatives either give in to competition and
degenerate into capitalist firms or they founder.
Yet contradictions regarding working conditions
and class factions also played out closer to
home and have a longer history; they pre-date
Mondragón's globalized labor force and therefore
suggest that they are not only the consequences
of Mondragón's integration into the
global economy but also of the inescapable limits
of the ability of co-operatives to challenge
capitalist social relations.

# Labor and Struggle at the Local Scale

My ethnographic study of a Fagor co-op in the
late 1980s to early 1990s, before the international
corporate strategy took off, showed that
shop-floor conditions, rank-and-file participation
in decision-making, and workers' feelings
of motivation were not better than they were in
a neighboring capitalist factory with a unionized
workforce. During the time of my research,
Fagor hired consultants to lay the groundwork
for just-in-time production. Assembly jobs
were redesigned for greater efficiency, flexible
work schedules replaced regular hours, and a
speedup was introduced. Unsurprisingly, co-op
workers were physically exhausted and emotionally
stressed. Worker-ownership did not
shield them from factory regimes that were
devised for profit maximization and workplace
discipline in the capitalist market. Neither did
the formal structures of democracy translate
into the real exercise of participation on the
shop floor. Managers were notably engaged and
active in co-op governance, but workers were
often inactive and uninterested. Meanwhile, in
the neighboring factory I studied for comparison,
an activist union council used contract provisions
to take a meaningful measure of control
over its workplace.[^/11]

A study by business management expert Iñaki
Heras-Saizarbitoria suggests that this gap
between formal rights and real power persists
today. Heras-Saizarbitoria observes that much of
the popular and scholarly literature on
Mondragón mistakes the views of executives
and managers and Mondragón's formal structures
for the facts of day-to-day activity, while
the perspectives of rank-and-file co-op member- _workers_
are largely missing from their accounts.
In interviews with member-workers in industrial
co-ops, he finds "decoupling" of
co-op principles from workers' attitudes and
experiences, and he observes little participation
in decision-making and low levels of debate and
internal reflection. He concludes that democracy
is not effectively exercised in daily work life.
Interviewees do not aspire to greater involvement,
rather they primarily value their job security
and act in "compliance" with management.
They use a managerial discourse that rehearses
the pressures of global competition and offshoring
to express "their sense of neglect or of giving
up" and to explain the necessary degeneration of
democratic principles if the co-ops are to remain
viable. Heras-Saizarbitoria believes further that
as a powerful corporate actor in the region,
Mondragón has played a key role in disseminating
"dominant regimes of managerialism and
productivity" that shape policy at the level of the
Basque autonomous government.[^/12]

I likewise saw that the co-ops had political
ramifications in a wider social field. Compared
with workers in the standard firm, co-op members
were less involved in and showed less solidarity
with the Basque labor movement, which
at the time was part of an active leftist coalition
for socialism and independence for the Basque
country. This was made clear on the occasion of
the 1990 metal-sector strike for the annual contract,
when co-op members stayed on the job
while workers in Mondragón's other factories
walked out. (This was an external solidarity
strike, and therefore permissible by co-op rules.)
Although they were not covered by the national
agreement, they had reason to be there, as their
salaries were pegged to the contract wage. More
important, their solidarity was expected as fellow
workers in the metal sector and an important
part of the local working class. Their absence
was palpable, and workers I talked to took it as a
slight to codes of solidarity.[^/13]

This legacy had ramifications when Fagor
members took to the street for their jobs and
their capital accounts, which were sacrificed in
the bankruptcy agreement. A longtime labor
movement activist told me that he joined the
demonstrations in defense of jobs but did not
support subsequent actions to fight for co-op
members' capital accounts.[^/14] To him, this
money was a symbol of the ways co-operators
divorced themselves from regional struggles,
and it represented their financial self-interests
over working-class affiliation. The Mondragón
co-ops engendered difference and division in
the town's working population decades before
reproducing them on a global scale.

# Cooperatives and Politics

Mondragón offers guideposts for worker self-organization,
equitable pay scales, and keeping
capital in place. For the current moment of
widespread precariousness, Mondragón
extends employment as a right of membership
rather than the prerogative of capital, and workers
point to job guarantees as the most prized
aspect of co-op membership. No one on the
side of workers would underestimate these
achievements. Equally, they should not ignore
the insecurity, lack of membership rights, and
low pay of temporary workers and subsidiary
wage laborers. Nor should they minimize the
fact that workplace democracy is of little day-to-day
salience for member-workers and cannot
insulate them from the market.

The bankruptcy of Fagor Electrodomésticos
exposes the limits of Mondragón to overcome
contradictions of the capital-labor relationship,
even if capital takes the form of a co-operative
corporation and exploitation is displaced to
international subsidiaries. For some, the solution
to the divisions in the local working class
and to global inequalities is to expand the system
and spread co-operatives all over the world.
Yet, if we concede that security, community-based
economy, and formal workplace democracy
in the Basque country rest on exploitation
and insecurity elsewhere, including temporary
workers close to home, then scaling-up begs the
question, albeit at a greater scale.

Although co-operatives can increase the
immediate social welfare of members, design
economic democracy in their workplaces, and
hold out hope for a more equitable and socialist
society, they are inevitably constrained by market
pressures and tend to become "defensive
towers in a landscape that they cannot change
by their presence."[^/15] The larger task of social
transformation requires strategies and alliances
that lead co-op members and activists to take a
role in a wider movement for social betterment,
at local and global scales. USW co-ops may set
such a course. The union-co-op model provides
worker-members with union representation and
a collective bargaining agreement, and this may
help ensure their power vis-à-vis managers,
whom they vote to appoint but whose perspectives
and interests may differ from their own. In
addition, their union affiliation will connect
them to workers in non-co-operative workplaces,
and possibly, in turn, to larger working-class
organizations and struggles. As union
co-ops open in the United States, it will be
important to study the experiences of rank-and-file
workers and to document working conditions
and the exercise of participatory
democracy in daily work life. It will likewise be
critically important to see what kinds of connections
co-op workers may develop to broader
collectives, struggles, and movements.

The current moment --- when activists foment
co-operative experiments; city governments,
banks, NGOs, and community organizations
collaborate to bring them about; and economic
crisis and austerity expose the failure of capitalism
to secure the common good --- may prove to
be an auspicious time when co-ops can contribute
to a wider-ranging effort for progressive
social change. All the more reason that we
should ask difficult questions of the Mondragón
model and about the division and segmentation
of labor versus alliance and solidarity, at local
and global scales.

# Acknowledgments

I thank Anjel Erasti and Juan Ramon Garai for sending
me scholarly and newspaper accounts of recent
developments in Mondragón. An earlier version of
this article appeared in _Global Dialogue_.

# Declaration of Conflicting Interests

The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest
with respect to the research, authorship, and/or
publication of this article.

# Funding

The author(s) received no financial support for the
research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.


[^/1]: Personal communication with Mondragón residents,
2013--2014.

[^/2]: Jon Balda Odriozola, "El Impacto del
Cooperativismo el la Economía Vasca. El Caso
Fagor y la Apuesta por Empleo" (master's thesis,
Univesidad del País Vasco, 2015).

[^/3]: Anjel Errasti. "Mondragón's Chinese Subsidiaries:
Coopitalist Multinationals in Practice."
_Economic and Industrial Democracy_ 36 (2015):
479--99. I have adjusted the 2012 figures provided
by Errasti to reflect losses after Fagor's
closure.

[^/4]: For the composition of the workforce by sector,
see Saioa Arando, Fred Freundlich, Monica
Gago, Derek C. Jones, and Takao Kato,
"Assessing Mondragón: Stability & Managed
Change in the Face of Globalization" (William
Davidson Institute Working Paper # 1003,
November 2010).

[^/5]: Errasti, "Mondragón's Chinese Subsidiaries."

[^/6]: [http://zsp.net.pl/fagormastercook_workcamp](http://zsp.net.pl/fagormastercook_workcamp).

[^/7]: Arando _et al._, "Assessing Mondragón," 12.

[^/8]: Ramon Flecha and Pun Ngai, "The Challenge
for Mondragón: Searching for the Cooperative
Values in Times of Internationalization,"
_Organization_ 21, no. 5 (2014): 668--82.

[^/9]: Arando _et al._, "Assessing Mondragón."

[^/10]: Sharryn Kasmir, "Can Worker Cooperatives
Save American Manufacturing?" A Conversation
with the Steelworkers. Rob Witherell, _Regional
Labor Review_, Fall 2010; Rob Witherell, Chris
Cooper, and Michael Peck, "The Union Co-op
Model," March 26, 2012, available at [https://www.usw.org/union/allies/The-Union-Co-op-Model-March-26-2012.pdf](https://www.usw.org/union/allies/The-Union-Co-op-Model-March-26-2012.pdf).

[^/11]: Sharryn Kasmir, _The Myth of Mondragón:
Cooperatives, Politics and Working-Class Life
in a Basque Town_ (New York: SUNY Press,
1996).

[^/12]: Iñaki Heras-Saizarbitoria, "The Ties That
Bind? Exploring the Basic Principles of
Worker-Owned Organizations in Practice,"
_Organization_ 21, no. 5 (2014): 645--65.

[^/13]: Kasmir, _The Myth of Mondragón_.

[^/14]: "El Modelo de Mondragón Tiene Pies de
Barro," _El Diario Vasco_, October 20, 2013,
37; "Los Socios de Fagor Electrodomésticos se
Juegan 131 Milliones Imvertidos," _El Diario
Vasco_, October 26, 2013. 36.

[^/15]: Peter Marcuse, "Cooperatives on the Path
to Socialism?" _Monthly Review_ 66, no. 9
(February 2015), available at [https://monthlyreview.org/2015/02/01/cooperatives-on-the-path-to-socialism/](https://monthlyreview.org/2015/02/01/cooperatives-on-the-path-to-socialism/).
