_In the last two years a lot has been written on Kashmir. But arguments on all sides have been more in the
nature of assertions rather than informed reasoning. Just as most Indians instinctively recoil at the very suggestion
of Kashmir's secession, among those who uphold the right of self-determination, Kashmir's separation is
an article of faith. A principle, however, does not have a priori application. More importantly, each time a demand
for separation is made it reflects on the character of the polity from which separation is sought. This paper attempts
to clarify the Kashmir imbroglio by investigating its genesis in the context of the Indian state's responses._

\ 

# I

Every now and then reports appear about
destruction of temples or the change of
names of villages in Jammu and Kashmir.
As many as 62 temples, it is claimed, were
'burnt and damaged in Kashmir by terrorists
in 1990'. A list of 644 villages alleged to have
been renamed in 1981--82 by J and K government
order is provided. The inference is that
many traditional places have been given
Islamic names in Kashmir.

When the state and central governments
did nothing to refute these allegations an
'informal' inquiry was instituted by a senior
civil servant. A _tehsildar_, in his official
capacity, visited the places alleged to have
been damaged and after verifying wrote a
report. The contents of the report remain undisclosed.
But an article based on the report
was carried in a newspaper.[^/1] Suggesting
that there was no truth in the allegation of
damage or destruction of temples at
Jawaharnagar, Karan Nagar, Ganpatyar,
Dashmani Akhara, Bairav, Sheetalnath and
Fateh Kadal. Indeed some of the temples
and '_dharamshalas_' were occupied by CRPF
or BSF and yet not made targets by
militants. The report also found no communal
pattern behind changes of names.

It is not as though these allegations are
new. They have been around for a long time
As early as 1986 a similar brouhaha was
made about desecration of temples. But
since 1989 there has been a continuous
barrage with the BJP making use of this in
the past two elections. There is no reason
to believe that the government is unaware of
all this.

Considering the delicateness of the matter
the question arises why did the state and
central governments not refute the allegations,
conduct a formal inquiry and publicise
the findings? And why the silence to this
date? Consider the ease with which official
statements rebutting critics are issued. No
sooner an inquiry is ordered, to look into
criminal acts of the security forces, within
days if not hours a statement giving the 'true
facts' exonerating the security forces are
released. Why therefore the reticence on this
issue?

The reason for the reticence, I believe, is
that it helps maintain a sharp image of the
'other' as lawless and violently fanatical in
their conspiratorial pursuits to dismember
the 'nation'. The reticence then goes to help
perpetuate not only hostility towards the
'other' but sustains a self-image which
goes to the very roots of the 'official
nationalism'[^/2] of post-partition India.

Recent events show that in multi-lingual
and multi-religious societies ethnicity seems
to serve more readily as a basis for interest
articulation and aggregation, as well as the
mobilisation of social groups. It appears,
that in such societies primordial ties are
more real and thus more effective as a means
of pursuing political goals. But this tendency
does not derive from some innate propensity
of people to respond to primordial
stimuli, rather it is indicative of the failure
of the political process to provide solutions
to competing and conflicting interests on a
secular and democratic basis. Ethnicity may
be defined "as the tendency of groups bound
together by consciousness of common
ancestry, religion, sect, language or cultural
tradition to strive for the protection of the
interests of their members in relation to
other groups and the state" \[Ahmed, 1990,
p. 2\]. This feeling of belonging together, of
sharing common symbols and a structure of
tradition, provides cohesion to the ethnic
identity.

But primordial difference at times
generate conflict while at other times they
co-exist in relative peace and stability. Also,
since primordial differences can be several,
the important fact is to locate which specific
difference is being activated and stressed and
why, in specific situations \[Ahmed, pp. 3--4
and Dipankar Gupta, 1991, p. 8\]. For instance
it is perfectly possible in certain situations
to perceive class oppression in terms
of ethnic divisions and it is also possible to
deny ethnic divisions in the name of class
oppression. Arguments and counter-arguments
on the issue of reservation is a
reminder of this phenomenon.

A fact to remember here is that there
seems to be a close relationship between the
state and a dominant ethnicity. States
generally are distinguishable on some ethnic
basis: language, religion, or some other
particularity. In multi-ethnic societies an
identifiable ethnic group aspires to and often
indeed dominates the state giving rise to
what has come to be described as official
nationalism. In India, attempts at constructing
a nation has proceeded along the lines
of carving out ethnicity built around cultural
artefacts of Hinduism howsoever defined or
understood. And it is this Hinduism which
informs the very notion of 'national
mainstream'.

Hinduism is not, however, a stable and
constant construct. There are far too many
lines of fissure in it; caste, language, and
sects. Nevertheless there is a deliberate
ongoing process which seeks to define
Hinduism. One such effort underway
defines the 'Hindu' as one who looks upon
the land that extends from Indus to the seas
as his 'fatherland', regards it as his
'holyland', and claims as his own the culture
of his race expressed in the classical language
Sanskrit \[Andersen and Damle, 1987, pp. 34
and 150\]. In this the 'otherness' is
automatically clear, being one which does
not fit this in its totality. Thus the coalescing
of interest articulation is only in relation to
its binary opposite i.e. the perception of the
'other'.

Assimilation, however, is problematic.
Whilst integration means inclusion into a
larger whole while simultaneously retaining
one's separate group identity, assimilation
would require the group to merge itself completely;
an act of near self-obliteration of
one's cultural mores and traditions in favour
of the dominant group. This is the position
of the above mentioned 'mainstream'
nationalism in India with regard to cultural
others and minorities.

On the other hand, deliberate attempts to
assimilate ethnic groups into some unified
community too have gained ground and
have usually been accompanied by the
employment of force. Given the centrist
nature of the state the politics of assimilation
are neither democratic nor secular. Therefore,
ethnic problems explode into separatist
challenges when the state has been _perceived_
to have moved away from its democratic and
secular credentials.

The genesis of the Kashmir problem lies
in the events of 1947, in particular the
partition of the country. The attempts at
assimilating Kashmir demonstrate most
sharply the official nationalism of the
Indian state. The reason being that this was
a predominately Muslim state under a Dogra
Hindu ruler where the pre-eminent political
formation in the state was in favour of the
state's accession to India. The trajectory of
the Kashmir crisis can be understood when
one observes the coming together and the
drifting away of Kashmir from post-partition
India.

The official nationalism of the post-partition
period sought to create an integrated
India. Unencumbered by the need
to accommodate the All India Muslim
League (AIML), the Indian National Congress
(INC) turned its back on all the major
'concessions' it had earlier pledged.

Constitution making, for instance, underwent
a significant and decisive change with
the June 3, 1947 announcement to divide the
country. This had repercussions on issues
such as federation, official language policy,
minority safeguards, and secularism. A
major illiberal thrust on these issues does
signify the fortification of a perspective
which received endorsement with partition,
namely, the privileging of a national personality
understood in religious-cultural
terms. Consequently, along with the efforts
towards centralisation of economic and
political powers the capitalist state also
attempted to bring about 'homogenisation'
of culture \[Devnathan, 1990, pp. 6--16\].

Therefore the official ideology of the
Indian 'nation'-state embedded in the Constitution
can serve as the reference point for
seeking to understand the ideas that guided
India's relations with Kashmir. The question
of the union, of minorities, of national
language, of secularism, all surface vividly
in the history of independent India's interaction
with Kashmir.

It is important to focus on the questions
mentioned above for they help to identify
the continuity between the formation of
'official nationalism' and the development
of separatism. True no idea however consistent
can have much hope of being accepted
if the soil for its acceptance is not prepared.
This soil was prepared, as we shall soon see,
in the manner in which the demand for self-determination
by the Kashmiris on the
Indian side of Kashmir was created by a
deliberate logic of creating "India, that is
Bharat" proclaimed by the Constitution.[^/3]

# II

It is commonly believed by the RSS and
its sympathisers that Kashmir became a part
of India when the _maharaja_ Hari Singh of
his 'free will' joined India.[^/4] Although
according to VP Menon, secretary in the
ministry of states and confidant of Sardar
Patel, the ruler of Kashmir was "hoping for
the best while continuing to do nothing.
Besides he was toying with the notion of an
'Independent Jammu and Kashmir'"
\[V P Menon, 1961, p. 377\]. It was the major
political force arrayed against the ruler
which favoured accession to India. This tilt
towards India was the product of a vision
of this popular force in favour of a
democratic secular India. In no small
measure this was also conditioned by the
historical experience of Kashmir.

The regime of the _maharaja_ had an
overtly communal character. The structure
and policy of Dogra absolutism discriminated
against the Kashmiris, and in particular,
the Muslim masses of the valley, who were
at the bottom of the social hierarchy in the
state. The lack of an organised movement
till 1930--31 helped the state machine manned
by Punjabis and Dogra Rajputs to coerce
and oppress the subordinate classes. Even
the Kashmiri Pandits were victims of Dogra
autocracy in the initial period because more
than 60% of gazetted posts went to
Dogras, especially Rajputs, despite their
inferior educational qualifications \[Prakash
Chandra, 1985, p. 38\].

The backwardness of the Muslims was the
product of the policy of the _Maharaja_ to
keep them out of power and patronage. He
did not provide them with equal opportunities
in trade, industry, education, jobs,
and agriculture. The Muslims of the state,
thus, became the worst sufferers from the
triple burden of racism, communalism and
casteism. This was evident in the juridical
structure under the _Maharaja_ which laid
down that everyone except a Dogra man
could be hanged for murder \[Chandra,
p. 39\].

The communalisation of the feudal structure
was the basis of Dogra Hindu rule. The
Hindus from outside were given opportunities
to establish business, trade and
industry on far more favourable terms than
those offered to the Muslims of the valley.
"The communal nature of the feudal
economy was evident in the fact that out of
25 _jagirs_ that were granted during the first
five years of _Maharaja_ Hari Singh, only two
went to the ... Muslims," \[Chandra\].

# POPULAR ANTI-FEUDAL MOVEMENT

These feudal policies of the _Maharaja_ set
the stage for the 1931 upsurge. The issues
of desecration of the Koran and the
dismissal of the complainant from services
triggered the upsurge. The arrest of a young
man Abdul Qadeer who exhorted the people
to overthrow the Hindu _Maharaja_ and his
trial inside the Srinagar jail premises
occasioned the incident on July 13, 1931 in
which 17 people died in police firing and
scores injured. To this day July 13 is
celebrated as _Martyr's Day_ all over the
Kashmir valley. Notwithstanding this the
revolt against such a regime cannot be
branded as Muslim communalism. In fact,
it was a revolt against feudal fetters. "The
_zamindars_ of Kashmir are deprived of the
proprietary rights over their lands, whereas
those of Jammu fully enjoy those rights",
wrote the unknown author/s of a document
submitted to the ruler in 1931. They added,
"The people of Kashmir cannot sell or
mortgage their lands of their own free will.
They cannot even cut the mulberry, the
walnut, and the chinar trees on their private
lands" \[NN Raina, 1988, p. 100\]. Alongside
were other trappings of feudal autocracy "a
pattern of abduction, rape, desecration of
the Holy Quran, mosques, and sacrilege in
other ways" \[Raina\].

The protest helped the growth of a movement
against the _Maharaja_. In the following
years of freedom struggle two contending
formations emerged. In 1938 the Muslim
Conference split with a section led by Sheikh
Abdullah forming the All Jammu and
Kashmir National Conference (AJKNC). The latter
described the 1931 upsurge as "a war of the
oppressed against the oppressor. Its aim is
nothing more or less than to seek justice and
redress. If the ruler was Muslim and his subjects
the Hindus, the war would have been
fought on similar grounds" \[Prakash
Chandra, p. 39\].

Not unexpectedly _Maharaja_'s presentation
of the events of 1931 succeeded in alarming
the communalist section in India. In the
name of Indian nationalism a resolution was
passed by the Hindu Mahasabha in its Akola
session of August 15, 1931 which stated:
"The Hindu Mahasabha looks upon with
fear at the fiery propaganda carried on
against the _Maharaja_ of Kashmir". And the
_Maharaja_ was far from passive: he blessed
the formation of three political parties: The
Kashmiri Pandit Conference, the Hindu
Sabha in Jammu and the Sikhs' Shiromani
Khalsa Darbas.

Inside Kashmir some leaders among
Kashmiri pandits adopted a narrow communal
and opportunist posture. They
demanded job security for themselves (along
the lines accorded to Anglo--Indians).

The convergence of feudal vested interests
belonging to both Hindu and Muslim communities
becomes evident with the progress
and maturity of the AJKNC struggle.
Various landlords like Nazir Hussain,
Jagirdar Raja Villayat Khan, Akram Khan,
etc, openly aligned with the _Maharaja_
against the AJKNC led by Sheikh Abdullah.
Mirwaiz Maulvi Yusuf Shah also joined this
alliance at the end of 1932. The NC leaders
were now confronted by various hostile
forces.

The growth of political consciousness in
Jammu and Kashmir took place against the
background of the above social conditions.
Since, the Muslims of Kashmir valley were
the first target of feudal exploitation, they
also quite naturally happened to be the first
to raise the banner of revolt against it in
1930--31. The success of the struggle lay in
the participation of all sections of population
in the state by breaking away from the
AJKMC and forming AJKNC in 1939. Subsequently
NC affiliated itself to the All India
States People's Conference, an organisation
floated by the INC. This move was not a
product of a private battle between leaders.
It arose out of a difference in perspective.
AJKMC explained the oppression of
Kashmiri Muslims in terms of their religious
opposition to the ruler and therefore saw the
solution in a theocratic state. The AJKNC,
on the other hand, explained the oppression
to be a result of feudalism and ending feudal
hold of the _jagirdars_ as the solution.
Their demand was for socio-economic
independence.

>It was in the background of such political
changes that the toilers formed one of the
strongest detachments of the National Conference
in the years 1940--50. Their impact
was obvious in the Mirpur session of the
National Conference in 1942 when it passed
the resolutions sending greetings to the Red
Army and expressing its solidarity in the
heroic fight against fascism. They provided
the authorship to the _Naya Kashmir_
manifesto of the National Conference \[_Ibid_.,
p. 40\].

The _Naya Kashmir_ manifesto spelled out
in the most unambiguous terms the 'Peasant
Charter', 'Workers Charter', 'Women
Charter', etc.

# FROM ANTI-FEUDALISM TO ETHNIC PROTECTION

It was this programme that helped consolidate
the Kashmiri identity. A memorandum
sent by NC to the Cabinet Mission in
May 1946 affirmed the right of the people
to absolute freedom from autocratic rule.

The basic underpinning of this idea of
Kashmiri identity was its anti-feudalism.

The process of consolidation of Kashmiri
national identity was aided by several other
factors. Territorial homogeneity, common
cultural characteristics, and historical
heritage, as well as linguistic identity contributed
to the Kashmiri sense of ethnic self-awareness.
It is this ethnic self-consciousness
and the quest for survival and growth which
formed the basis for the subsequent search
for a political solution whereby their distinct
character could be protected and furthered.
It was by no means an isolationist search.
Therefore, the final parting of ways between
the AJKNC and AIML by 1946 reflects a
conscious political choice made by the preeminent
Kashmiri political formation to seek
an arrangement with the INC for an accession
which provided maximum internal
autonomy to J and K. The point to note is
that this identity developed more clearly in
the process of the overthrow of Dogra rule.

A point to remember is that the national
movement in Kashmir forged ahead amidst
a popular all-India movement against the
British Raj even as the Hindu and Muslim
division was gaining ground. After the anti-feudal
struggle reached its next high point
in 1946. Launching this struggle for a
decisive victory, Sheikh Abdullah, on May
15, 1946 reiterated at Srinagar:

>The demand that the princely order should
quit the state is a logical extension of the
policy of 'Quit India'. When the freedom
movement demands complete withdrawal of
British power, logically enough the stooges
of British imperialism should also go and
restore sovereignty to its real owners, the
people ... _the rulers of Indian states have
always played traitor to the cause of Indian
freedom_. A revolution upturned the mighty
Tsars and the French Revolution made short
work of the ruling class of France. The time
has come to tear up the Treaty of Amritsar,
and Quit Kashmir. Sovereignty is not the
birthright of _Maharaja_ Hari Singh. Quit
Kashmir is not a question of revolt. It is a
matter of right (emphasis added) \[Prakash
Chandra, p. 40\].

The significance of this perspective can
only be appreciated against the continuing
propaganda of the MC appealing to the
Muslim ness of the Kashmiri. Indeed, in
January 1947 MC willingly participated in
the elections even though it was based on
limited franchise which allowed only 8% of the adult population to vote. Finally,
30% of the 6,07,000 eligible voters cast
their votes. Predictably the MC won 16
Muslim seats out of 21. The NC had unequivocally
boycotted the polls.

Although the NC was the more popular
of the two, MC retained an articulated
presence in J and K especially in the Poonch
region of J and K state. Once the communal
bloodbath began the appeal of MC was
certainly on the ascendant. Political
developments in J and K paralleled happenings
elsewhere. Movement of refugees
through the state to and from the divided
Punjab accentuated tensions. Within
Kashmir the MC combined its 'no tax campaign'
with an appeal for 'direct action'
along the lines of AIML. The _Maharaja_
using his Hindu--Sikh troops brutally
suppressed the MC agitation. The 'quit
Kashmir' campaign launched by the NC
against the _Maharaja_ too was ruthlessly
attacked by the troops. In the midst of these
developments Dogra ruler Hari Singh and
his prime minister Ram Chand Kak decided
to remain ambivalent about which dominion
they would join. The ruler had signed a
Standstill Agreement with Pakistan in regard
to maintenance of the existing arrangement
in respect of posts, telegraph etc. When the
offer of similar Standstill Arrangement was
made to it India prevaricated. Simultaneously,
the _Maharaja_ strengthened the Sikh and
Hindu garrison in the Muslim areas.
Towards the end of July 1947 the _Maharaja_
ordered Muslims to deposit arms with the
police. As the agitation spread repression
against Muslims became worse especially in
Jammu and Srinagar.

In the tussle for leadership of the movement
in Kashmir it was, by no means a
foregone conclusion that NC had complete
sway. Two days before Sheikh Abdullah was
released Nehru wrote to Sardar Patel that
Sheikh Abdullah "is very anxious to keep
out of Pakistan and relies upon us a great
deal for advice. But at the same time he
cannot carry his people with him unless he
has _something definite_ to place before them"
(emphasis added) \[A G Noorani, 1991, p. 19\].

That "something definite" NC needed was
the assurance of the Indian leaders that
accession would be subject to approval of
the people of Kashmir, thus outflanking the
MC. This commitment was made a part of
the Instrument of Accession, signed on
October 26, 1947, through the exchange of
letter between the _maharaja_ and the
governor-general of India. But winning over
AJKNC was not the only concern. There
were other considerations too. The assurance
was also meant to bring the ruler and NC
together. Only thus can developments
leading up to accession be explained.

On February 20, 1947, the declaration of
transfer power to the responsible Indian
hands was made. Clement Atlee, the prime
minister of Britain declared: "As was
explicitly stated by the Cabinet Mission, His
Majesty's Government do not intend to hand
over their powers and obligations under
paramountcy to any government of British
India" In response the INC first appealed
to the Chancellor of Chamber of Princes to
allow state representatives to join the Constituent
Assembly.[^/5] Subsequently on April
18, 1947 addressing the annual session of the
All India States People's Conference Nehru
warned that any state which did not come
into the Constituent Assembly would be
treated by the country as a hostile state. The
INC also demanded that the political
department and its agencies should be
transferred to the new government of India.

The political department was renamed the
states department which took over the job
of negotiations with the princely states.
Since the general tendency among the rulers
was to make the most of the lapse of paramountcy
negotiations between princely
states and government of India became important.
V P Menon the secretary in the
states department revived an early scheme
of his from December 1942 under which
states would be asked to accede only on
defence and external affairs. To this was
added communication.

Menon also suggested that the alienation
of Hindu rulers from Pakistan following the
communal flare-up in north India could be
used to advantage. This was of particular
significance when considering Kashmir.
Moreover, with regard to Kashmir the states
ministry had made no approach to the ruler
at all. In states which were recalcitrant or
prevaricating such as Junagadh and Hyderbad
the respective States People's Conference
were supported by the government of India
to demand accession to India and the religious
affinity of the population came in as
handy here as that of rulers in the wake of
communal holocaust and partition. But in
Kashmir the situation was altogether
special --- the Hindu ruler was vacillating and
delaying his decision while the party allied
to INC through the All India States People's
Conference was more popular among the
Kashmiri Muslim majority.

Writing to Sardar Patel on September 27,
1947, Nehru wanted him "to take some action
... to force the pace and turn events in
the right direction. We have definitely a great
asset in the National Conference provided
it is properly handled. It would be pity to
lose this. Sheikh Abdullah has repeatedly
given assurances of wishing to co-operate
and of being opposed to Pakistan; also to
abide by my advice. I would again add time
is the essence of the business and things
must be done in a way so as to bring about
the accession of Kashmir to the Indian
Union as rapidly as possible with the cooperation
of Sheikh Abdullah". The phraseology
itself points to the very conscious
understanding of the interests of the 'union'.
But that apart the key phrase is "assurance
of wishing to co-operate and of being opposed
to Pakistan". This became necessary
because "if by any chance that \[National
Conference\] is hostile or even passive then
the _Maharaja_ and his Government become
isolated and the Pakistani people will have
a relatively free field" \[MJ Akbar, 1991,
p. 104\]. Implicitly, the Indian leadership
regarded itself as a claimant for Kashmir
precisely as Pakistan was. It is an irony of
history that in the very contention between
the AIML and the INC to possess Kashmir
lay a basic unity of purpose. And to this day
the two countries treat Kashmir as a matter
to be resolved between India and Pakistan.
But to return to the original point it was
equally clear to both AIML and INC that
the ruler was on his own in no position to
exercise his "free will"; and of the two forces
NC alone could ensure Kashmir's accession
with India. In other words for Indian leadership
the AJKNC was the only necessary
agent furthering the Indian claim to
Kashmir.

Sardar Patel did take action as Nehru
desired. One of them was to solicit the help
of RSS leader Golwalkar to persuade the
_Maharaja_ to join India. In his turn Golwalkar
met the _Maharaja_ in October 1947 and urged
him to recruit Punjabi Hindus and Sikhs
into his militia \[Andersen and Damle, 1987,
p. 49\]. (It is interesting, in this connection
that after the second world war the _Maharaja_
had refused to recruit 60,000 out of the nearly
72,000 Muslim citizens of the state who had
been drafted in the British Army during the
war because they were potential risks as
Members of his army. But he did accept the
rest of the non-Muslims. In 1947 the ruler
strengthened the garrisons further by importing
more Hindus and Sikhs) \[Korbel, 1966,
p. 54--5\].

The Congress leaders too visited Srinagar,
Soon thereafter RC Kak who had signed the
Standstill Agreement with Pakistan was
removed as premier replaced by Janak Singh
and later by Meher Chand Mahajan. Sheikh
Abdullah was released on September 29,
1947 while MC leaders "who had been far
less pronounced in their hostility to the
_Maharaja_ when their political opponent remained
behind bars" \[Korbel, p. 70\]. What
is more/less than a month after his release
Sheikh Abdullah announced that "If the 40
lakhs of people living in J and K are bypassed
and the state declares accession to India
or Pakistan, I shall raise the banner of revolt:
of course we will naturally opt to go to that
Dominion where our own demand for freedom
receives recognition and support ..."
\[_Ibid_., p. 71\]. On October 26, Sheikh Abdullah
was asked to form an interim government.
On the same day Hari Singh signed
the instrument of accession. The very next
day Indian troops were dispatched to Kashmir.
And three days later Sheikh Abdullah was
appointed as the head of emergency administration.
In the light of this history the
accession and its aftermath acquire even
more significance.

On October 26, 1947 the instrument of accession
had been signed. The government of
India had not shown any demonstrable interest
in winning the people's approval for
this measure. By referring the Indo--Pak
dispute over Kashmir to the United Nations
on December 31, 1947 the Indian government
was provided a rationale for prevarication.
Resolutions passed by the UN Security
Council called for ceasefire and proposed
withdrawal of troops as the second stage for
holding referendum. However, this did not
stop the Indian government from allowing
four representatives of NC to participate in
the deliberations of the Indian Constituent
Assembly when the question of merger of
Indian states into Indian dominion came up
for discussion. In November 1949, Pakistan
protested before the UN Commission against
the Indian decision to admit Kashmir's four
representatives to the Indian Constituent
Assembly. India's External Affairs Ministry
response dated November 21, 1949 is
significant:

>While the Constitution of India, which _inter
alia_ provided for the relation of acceding
States to the Government of India, was under
consideration it would have been unfair to
the Government and the people of the state
of Jammu and Kashmir to deny them the opportunity
of participation. It was not intended
to, and does not, in fact alter the Government
of India's determination to abide, in the
matter of accession, by the freely declared
will of the people of Jammu and Kashmir ...
\[Noorani, 1964, p. 35\].

In signing the instrument of accession the
government of India had already declared
that "Where the issue of the accession has
been the subject of dispute the question of
accession should be decided in accordance
with the wishes of the people of the state ..."
\[Noorani, p. 45\].

But attempts were made to scuttle popular
validation of the accession by the Indian
government. Four months prior to the letter
from the external affairs ministry to the
UN commission, in July 1949, a note circulated
by the ministry of states, which was
headed by Sardar Patel submitted the following
suggestion for consideration by the
Drafting Committee of the Constituent
Assembly:

>(1) Jammu and Kashmir state may be treated
as part of Indian territory and shown in
states specified in Part III of Schedule 1. (2)
A special provision may be made in the Constitution
to the effect that until Parliament
provides by law that all the provisions of the
Constitution applicable to the states specified
in Part III will apply to this state, the power
of Parliament to make laws for the state will
be limited to the items specified in the
schedule to the instrument of accession ...
or to the corresponding entries in List I of
the new constitution \[FIC, Vol IV, p. 556\].

Equally significant in this context was
Gopalswamy Ayyangar's argument in
1949 --- "We have also agreed that the will of
the people through the instrument of the
Constituent Assembly will determine the
Constituency of the state as well as the
sphere of Union jurisdiction over the
state ..." \[B Shiva Rao, 1968, p. 552--3\]. The
promise of referendum was changed to mean
a decision taken by the "will of people
through the instrument of the (J and K)
Constituent Assembly".

What is important to note is that the Constituent
Assembly Gopalswamy Ayyangar
talked about was intended as an alternative
to plebiscite. And, therefore, Article 306(A)
he tabled before the CA unequivocally stated
that Article I (which enunciated that India
would be a Union of States and that the
states and territories of the Union would be
the states and their territories specified in
Parts I, II and III of the First Schedule)
would apply to J and K. It was furthermore
stressed that once the J and K CA had made
known its choice then the "position of the
Jammu and Kashmir State would also correspond
as closely as possible to that of the
other states in the Indian Union" \[Rao,
1968\]. Obviously a deliberate ambiguity was
being inserted.

When the J and K Constituent Assembly
was constituted Nehru informed parliament
on March 28, 1951 that "(w)e have made it
perfectly clear that the authority of the
Security Council is not challenged in anyway
by the proposal to have a Constituent
Assembly in Kashmir ... the conditions
which we consider necessary for a plebiscite
are contained in the resolution of the Security
Council, resolution of August, 1948 and
January 1949" \[A G Noorani, 1964,
pp. 46--7\].

It is argued that the US--Pakistan military
pact changed everything, although, as early
as May 15, 1954 well after the pact was signed,
Nehru said "India still stands by her international
commitments on the Kashmir
issue and will implement them at the appropriate
time" \[Noorani, 1964, p. 68\]. But the
union home minister Govind Ballabh Pant
in a speech at Srinagar on July 7, 1955 stated
that "Kashmir's accession was a reality
which could not be changed because the
people, through their representatives in the
Constituent Assembly, had decided to remain
in India" \[Noorani, p. 69\].

Not surprisingly by February 10, 1957
Nehru said "I am willing to talk with
Pakistan or any country or UN provided two
basic facts are accepted. One basic fact is
that Kashmir became _part_ of India in
October, 1947. The other basic fact is that
of Pakistan's unprovoked and improper invasion
of Kashmir" \[_Ibid_., p. 75\]. There was
no longer any reference to UN or commitment
to plebiscite.[^/6]

But if Kashmir became an integral part
of India in 1947 then was the repeated promise
of plebiscite merely a charade? Or was
it meant to facilitate the process of incorporation
under way? What was the vision of
post-partition India that did not allow for
referendum/plebiscite and instead worked
for full merger of the state?

# CONSTITUTION MAKING OR MAKING OF CULTURAL MARKERS

The basic ideals of the Indian state are
embedded in the Constitution. It was the
Constitution which was to bring about social
and economic reforms, or so it was hoped.
Therefore, it is necessary to identify those
characteristics of the Constitution which go
on to provide the conceptual framework
which lay behind the Indian government's
relations with Kashmir.

The Constituent Assembly was not elected
on universal franchise but on extremely
limited franchise (10% of the population
in the provinces and 1% for the
Central Assembly). The existing provincial
legislatures based on limited voting rights
elected members for the Constituent Assemblies.
A single party INC had the overwhelming
majority recourse was taken to
smaller committees where the important
proposals were worked out, and organisational
discipline could enforce decision, failing
which whips were used.

The Cabinet Mission had backed the plans
for a federal structure with a limited number
of compulsory central subjects such as
defence, communications and foreign affairs.
The federation would consist of
autonomous provinces in which would vest
the residuary subjects \[B Shiva Rao, 1968,
p. 67\]. But the partition saw an about-turn
with the preservation of India and a strong
centre being made the basic objective. With
the British Government's announcement of
June 3, 1947, the Union Constitution Committee
and the Provincial Constitution Committee
decided at a joint meeting on June 5
that in view of the June 3 announcement
"limitations imposed by the Cabinet Missions
plan on the form of the Constitution
no longer existed" \[S K Chaube, 1973, p. 78\].
The next day the Union Constitution Committee
arrived at the following decisions:
(a) the Constitution should be a federal
structure with a strong centre; and (b) residuary
powers would rest with the centre. In
short the pattern set by the Government of
India Act 1935 would be preserved.[^/7]

Certain other significant changes also occurred
which reflect on the general mood
within the INC dominated CA. Four of
these are important. First is the report of
the Linguistic Provinces Commission on
December 10, 1948 which by rejecting
linguistic provinces also rejected the position
maintained by Congress since 1921. It stressed:
"In order to secure this stability and integration
India should have a strong centre
and a national language". It goes on to warn
that the "formation of linguistic provinces
is sure to give rise to a demand for the
separation of other linguistic groups elsewhere".
Further: "above all it would bring
into existence provinces with a sub-national
bias at a time when nationalism is yet in its
infancy and is not in a position to bear any
strain" \[FIC, Volume IV, 1968, p. 476\].
Reorganisation of linguistic states took place
in the late 1950s only after a long-drawn-out
agitation. What is notable is that the CA in
attempting to create a strong centre and rejecting
the principle of linguistic states made
an obvious attempt at 'willed merger' with
the agencies of state taking on the role of
protector of the 'nation'. A language of the
nation was therefore necessary. A Anderson
notes: "It was not until the reign of Alexander
III (1881--94) that Russification became
official dynastic policy: long after Ukrainian,
Finnish, Lett and other (linguistic) nationalism
had appeared within the Empire"
\[Benedict Anderson, 1983, p. 83\]. Here is an
interesting parallel with Hindi-isation in
India.

There were two aspects to the language
dispute : (a) between Hindi and Urdu, (b)
between Hindi and non-Hindi languages.
Way back in 1925 Congress resolved that
"the proceedings of the Congress shall be
conducted, as far as possible, in Hindustani"
\[B Shiva Rao, 1968, p. 782\]. In selecting Hindustani
written either in Nagri or Persian
characters a compromise was struck. The
compromise acknowledged that Hindustani
was a composite of Hindi and Urdu accepting,
therefore, that Urdu was as much a part
of India as Hindi. Considering the emergence
of Hindi--Urdu conflict which represented
the Muslim and Hindu divide, Hindustani
was an eminently sensible choice.
Precisely therefore selection of Hindi was a
retrogressive step since Hindi was an artificial
construct, tracing itself back to the
'sacred' Hindu language of Sanskrit. It was
deemed to be the language of the majority
of north Indians. No sooner was partition
announced than the Congress members
became zealous champions of Hindi in
Devanagari script as the sole national
language for India. When the Congress
party met in the Constituent Assembly on
August 11, 1949 and unanimously adopted
Hindi written in Devanagari as the official
language there was no going back notwithstanding
appeals by Nehru or Maulana
Azad or even the reference made to Gandhi's
consistent championing of Hindustani. The
Hindi zealots had struck a compromise with
non-Hindi protagonists by agreeing to
postpone adoption of Hindi for official purposes
in non-Hindi regions,in return for their
support to adopt Hindi and not Hindustani.
In adopting Hindi the CA was giving its endorsement
to a position that regarded as
alien any source other than Sanskrit and any
script other than Devanagari to be nonIndian.
And considering the whole history
of the Hindi--Urdu dispute since third decade
of 19th century the identification of Hindi
with Hindu was hardly accidental.[^/8]

The third important change related to
minority rights. The Objective Resolution
adopted by the CA in December 1946 had
stated that "adequate safeguards shall be
provided for minorities, backward and tribal
area and depressed and other backward
classes." \[FIC, Vol II, 1968, p. 4\]. Once the
announcement of division of India was
made there had already occurred some shifting
of ground. Thus, the Advisory Committee
on Minorities recommended and the CA
adopted safeguards in August 1947 which
while doing away with 'separate electorates'
replaced them with 'joint electorates': provided
that as a general rule there shall be
reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes in
the various provincial legislative assemblies
on the basis of their population, for 10 years.
Within a year even these safeguards adopted
by the CA were said to "lead to a certain
degree of separatism ... contrary to the conception
of a secular democratic state" and
were shot down by the Advisory Committee
on the Minorities \[FIC, Vol IV, p. 429\].
What was even worse the Committee also
dropped the provision for administrative
machinery to ensure protection of
minorities. The provision for appointment
of special officers to investigate and report
on minority safeguards was changed. Instead,
now only a single officer was to be
appointed whose jurisdiction was limited to
cover atrocities against the scheduled castes
and tribes, Anglo--Indians, and other
backward classes \[FIC, Vol IV, p. 429\]. In
other words there was reluctance even to provide
for an agency to inquire into atrocities
against the Muslims.[^/9]

One should note that even at the time
when in August 1947 political safeguards for
minorities were being debated, Sardar Patel,
chairman of the 40-member Advisory Committee
had made clear a position subscribed
to by a majority and deserves to be quoted:

>When I agreed to reservation on the population
basis I thought that our friends of the
Muslim League would see the _reasonableness
of our attitude and accommodate themselves_
to the changed conditions after the separation
of the country. But I find them adopting
the same methods which were adopted
when separate electorates were first introduced
in this country and in spite of ample
sweetness in the language used there is a full
dose of poison in the method adopted \[Shiva
Rao, 1968, p. 760\].

In other words these safeguards were linked
to minorities' acknowledgement that the
majority was reasonable --- the implication
being that if the majority is reasonable there
is no need for the minorities to feel apprehensive
about their future. In other words
there is no need for safeguards. Ambedkar
maintained otherwise and argued that the
minorities "have loyally accepted the rule of
the majority which is basically _a communal
majority and not a political majority_. It is
for the majority to realise its duty not to
discriminate against the minorities. ... The
moment the majority loses the habit of
discriminating against the minority, the
minorities can have no ground to exist"
\[Shiva Rao, 1968, p. 771\].

In the name of 'oneness' discrimination
was disguised. While Sardar Patel spoke of
forgetting "that there is anything like a
majority or a minority ... there is only one
community", Nehru spoke of the danger of
minority "forgetting inner sympathy and
fellow feeling with the majority" \[Shiva Rao,
1968, p. 772\].

Reservation was, however, favoured for the
scheduled castes. The underlying reason for
different attitude was clear from Jagjivan
Ram's proposal that guarantees should be
directed to protect racial and religious
minorities such as Christians and tribal
population from "extinction" and "assimilation
of minorities like the Scheduled Castes
in the parent body by bringing them to a
level equal with that of others in the community"
\[Shiva Rao, 1968, p. 771\]. This is
precisely what happened. Scheduled Castes
were described as a "section of the Hindu
Community".[^/10] What is interesting is that
only after categorising _dalits_ as being part
of 'hindu society' were safeguards extended
to them. This amounted to consolidation
of Hindu society.

By extending reservations to the scheduled
caste Sikhs (Mazhabis, Ramdasias, Kabir
Panthis, Sikhigars, etc.) the Sikhs were _ipso facto_ included as Hindus. Conversely, it was
implied that social and educational backwardness
does not exist outside the Hindu
fold. It is a moot point whether the intention
was to make conversion of scheduled
castes into the non-Hindu fold unattractive
or make their entry into Hindu fold attractive.
In any case if the move to withdraw
safeguards for Muslims is seen in conjunction
with the provision of these to other minorities
it clearly emerges that cultural markers
for demarcation of those considered Hindus
was being undertaken.[^/11]

Herein lay the logic of giving the state the
right to reform Hindu society and the insistence
on removing reservations for
minorities while allowing them the right to
decide on their personal law. It is worth
mentioning that the CA had withdrawn the
safeguards for the minorities on the ground
that this would perpetuate communal difference.
The INC leadership pushed through
the dropping of safeguards under dubious
circumstances in the name of 'one community'.
But when it came to personal law all
arguments about 'secular democracy' simply
evaporated. Indeed, as events four decades
later so poignantly showed, differences of
a more debilitating kind were being fostered.[^/12]

Now even at the best of times the neutrality
of the state between various religious or
social groups means a bias in favour of the
majority or the dominant group. In India this
became pronounced because the religion of
the majority could not but receive greater
patronage. And since the Indian state saw its
role as being reformer of Hindu society the
implied tilt became more pronounced with
the use of symbols and concepts heavily
overlaid with emphasis on its Hindu origins.

This set the tone for subordination at the
altar of 'one community' and 'unity. It is
difficult to distinguish between the demand
for unity either from strong centre or from
a perspective which defines it in accordance
with a Hindu-ised notion of India. What also
needs emphasis is that members of the CA
were also members of government and, in
founding the Constitution the collective
wisdom of members of the government too
was being reflected. As a result the Constitution
set out the essential characteristic of official
nationalism. In this sense withdrawal of
safeguards, rejection of Hindustani, fear of
federalism, etc., become significant markers
in the attempt to shape India. As a corollary
since in Kashmir Muslims were a majority
they stood out as the 'other' which had to
be assimilated and reshaped in the image of
'India, i.e., Bharat'.

# THE THIRD WAY

In 1947 neither of the two major political
formations in J and K advocated independence
for the state. _Maharaja_ Hari Singh
maintained a policy of ambivalence And yet
the NC leadership began drifting away from
India, when it was they who in the first place
brought about accession. From the foregoing
discussion one can cull the perspective that
guided the Indian government's relations
with Kashmir. I shall here discuss how these
brought about Kashmir's drift away from
India.

Once the instrument of accession was
signed and despite the NC showing a clear
preference for Indian dominion \[V P Menon,
1961, p. 376\] differences arose over a variety
of issues. Simultaneously there was a gradual
weakening of left forces within NC and the
ascendancy of those forces which were willing
to be used by the central government.

The very first objection that the union
government had was over the institution of
political commanders in the national militia
under the emergency administration. Their
objection was to the presence of communists
or their sympathisers and also the institution
itself. Finally, Bakshi Ghulam Mohammed
as the deputy prime minister in-charge of the
home ministry took over the militia and
placed it under commanders supplied by the
Indian army \[N N Raina 1988, p. 159--60\]. In
fact the perception of communists as a threat
was a recurring theme and thus Patel wrote
to Nehru that "I am getting rather worried
about Kashmir ... \[with\] Sheikh _Sahib_'s
failure to deal with communist infiltration
in the state" \[Raina, 1988, p. 198\]. But this
anti-communism was equally strong within
NC ranks and communists were asked to
dissolve their own organisations and individually
place themselves under the
discipline of the 'war council' set up for
leading the 'quit Kashmir' agitation in
1946--47. But together with this the left itself
by adopting a flip-flop position allowed the
forces opposing them the opportunity to
purge them.

They first supported referendum only to
oppose it later.[^/13] And once they became
pre-occupied with US machinations they
gave up their previous evenhanded attitude
towards the two dominions, only to end up
finally seeking merger in India. An editorial
in _People's Age_ in 1948 argued that 'Kashmir
can be saved only by winning over the
peasants and ending feudal autocracy and
the reactionary policy of the appeasement
of the _Maharaja_ by the Indian union government
and by really liberating the peasants'.
Four years later the leader of the party in
the parliament appealed "for the creation
of an atmosphere in Kashmir conducive to
the State's final accession to India". The
emphasis had shifted from the concern for
'people' to what was best for India.

As a result the left allowed itself to be used
by the union government once Sheikh Abdullah
was accused of hobnobbing with the
US, little realising that a section of NC led
by Sheikh Abdullah was becoming concerned
at the way in which New Delhi was
obstructing, interfering, and trying to wriggle
out of its commitments. It is important
to note that throughout 1952--53 the valley
was reeling under drought. Indian assistance
was offered but with strings attached. Hence,
it was not acceptable. But once Sheikh was
arrested subsidies were extended to J and K.
(Not to forget that these were discontinued
by Sheikh Abdullah when he returned to
power in 1975).

To be sure the drift was not due to the
weakening of the left forces although this
did weaken the hold of Sheikh Abdullah.
But, the gradual weakening of the left was
symptomatic of the problem: interference by
the Indian government. Notwithstanding
these developments when elections for the
CA were held in 1951 NC ensured its
dominance through questionable means.
When elections took place in September--October
1951 for the 75 deputies AJKNC
won unopposed 43 out of the 45 seats for
Kashmir--Ladakh a week before the elections.
Two independent candidates withdrew later.
In Jammu nomination papers of 13 Praja
Parishad members were rejected. As a result
before the elections Sheikh Abdullah was
assured of 58 'friendly' members.

Nehru claimed on October 19, 1951 that
"the way people had voted (in J and K)
showed clearly that they were with the
National Conference and with India". This
of course says a lot about Indian government's
understanding of democracy. But
even more this set the pattern for subsequent
elections barring that in 1977. In the March
1957 elections in J and K the NC now headed
by Bakshi Ghulam Mohammed won 59
of the 72 seats uncontested. The tally of uncontested
seats came down to 39 in 1962
polls. But so blatant was the rigging that
even Nehru was compelled to chide Bakshi
in his letter dated March 4, 1962 that "it
would strengthen your position much more
if you lost a few seats to _bona fide_ opponents"
\[M J Akbar, 1991, p. 159\].

Nevertheless, the point to note is that the
NC leadership was willing to ensure that
J and K remained within India. Not only did
NC representatives including Sheikh Abdullah
participate in the Indian Constituent
Assembly but maintained a correct approach
towards Indian leadership in order to ensure
internal autonomy. In April 1964, Sheikh
Abdullah revealed that "I sought to ratify
the accession and other commitments of
mine through the Constituent Assembly. It
was the Government of India which contested
in the Security Council as well as in
Parliament the Assembly's right to do so"
\[A G Noorani, 1964, p. 59\]. In other words
not only was Sheikh willing to ratify the accession
but also "other commitments of
mine" which really meant the AJKNC programme.
But the Indian government did not
want him to. Infact they questioned the
competence of the J and K CA to undertake
this. The full significance of this
becomes clear from Sheikh's reply to Nehru's
complaint that "you do not attach any value
to any friendly advice we might give and,
indeed, consider it as improper interference
..." In his letter of July 10, 1950 Sheikh
replied:

>I have several times stated that we acceded
to India ... despite our having so many affinities
with Pakistan ... because we thought
our programme will not fit with their policy,
If however we are driven to the conclusion
that we cannot build our state on our own
lines, suited to our genius, what answer can
I give to my people and how am I to face
them? \[M J Akbar, 1991, p. 147--8\].

It is clear that the 'friendly advice' amounted
to obstructing the NC in implementation of
its programme.

Since the NC appeal and popularity
depended on its programme which offered
to change the material conditions of existence
of the people, if these were allowed
to be tampered with the credibility of NC
would have been impaired. These policies
without being directly related to the future
of J and K's relations with India were, nevertheless,
the foundation for its furtherance.

# LAND REFORM AND THE COMMUNAL TWIST

The total cultivated area in the state was
2,200,000 acre's most of which belonged to
the _Maharaja_ or to his feudal vassals. The
emergency government abolished all privileges.
Laws were enacted for the protection
of tenants so that they could no longer be
ejected. A moratorium was declared on their
debts, and their rights in mortgaged property
reinstated. They were now allowed to retain
three-quarter of the produce. By the end of
1950 through the Big Landed Estates Abolition
Act land was transferred to the peasants.
Under this act former owners were to be paid
compensation. But on March 26, 1952 the
J and K Constituent Assembly confiscated
all landed estates without any compensation.
But this policy met with opposition from the
union government. The relation between
union home ministry and J and K government
came under tremendous strain.[^/14]

In a communication sent to the emergency
administration led by Sheikh Abdullah on
May 4, 1948 on behalf of the union home
minister Sardar Patel, his secretary V Shankar
Wrote:

>Hon Minister has asked me to request you
to see Panditji (Nehru) about it ... inviting his
attention in particular to the fact that these
_jagirs_ are being sought to be resumed without
any payment of compensation whatever,
which is quite contrary to anything that we
are doing in the Indian Dominion. It is also
to be borne in mind that probably the _jagirdars_
would be mostly non-Muslims and this
would create a certain amount of discontent
and ill-feeling against the Government
among the minority (read non-Muslim) community
\[N N Raina, pp. 161--2\].

The two arguments put forward are interesting.
In the first place it was being contended
that policy of the J and K government
was not in line with that of the INC
in India. And in the second place the interests
of the _Jagirdars_ were being advanced
on the plea of protecting non-Muslims. That
the non-Muslims did not necessarily share
the class interests of _jagirdars_ was of less importance
than the fact that NC government
went against the advice of the union government,
proceeding along a path which not
only differed in terms of policy but also affected
the non-Muslim _jagirdars_. Thereby a
communal twist was given to the land reform
policy.

This was by no means an isolated incident.
The union home minister in March 1948 had
insisted on the _Maharaja_'s prerogative to appoint
the prime minister and approve the
cabinet. What is more it was suggested that
the existing bureaucratic structure of the
autocracy should continue. Very clearly it
was being suggested that union government
was mistrustful of the NC leadership. And
since the _Maharaja_ worked under the advice
of the Indian dominion and his administration
heavily biased in favour of non-Muslims
it was more in tune with the interests of the
INC government in India.

This is borne out by what India's director
of intelligence bureau, B N Mullik, had
to say about Patel's hostility towards NC.
Sardar Patel, says, Mullik 'apprehended that
Sheikh Abdullah would ultimately let down
India and Jawaharlal Nehru, and would
come out in his real colours; his antipathy
to the _Maharaja_ was not really an antipathy
to a ruler as such, but to the Dogras in
general and with Dogras he identified the
rest of the majority community in India"
\[M J Akbar, 1991, p. 146\].

# RSS DEMANDS FULL MERGER

Later events were to show that despite differences
Nehru and Patel shared the strategic
vision of union of India. Not only did the
Nehru government arrest Sheikh Abdullah
but also used the agitation launched by the
RSS fronts demanding full merger of
Kashmir into India to pressurise NC. By
1951--52 a campaign began in right earnest
by right wing parties for abrogation of Article
370 and for the union government's
intervention on behalf of non-Muslims in
Kashmir. An agitation was launched from
Jammu in 1952 by Janasangh, Hindu
Mahasabha and Ram Rajya Parishad. The
fact that officials of the Punjab government
accompanied Shyama Prasad Mokherjee,
leader of Janasangh in June 1953 only
helped drive home the point that out of ineptitude
or worse out of communal sympathies
the union government was reluctant
to isolate the anti-NC agitation \[MJ Akbar,
1985, p. 247\].

In fact when the Indian government exercised
restraint in dealing with Kashmir it
was made to appear as a concession in the
face of opposition at home. The RSS fronts
withdrew their agitation one month after the
death of their leader in Srinagar when in fact
going by their vitriolic agitation it ought to
have picked up. Interestingly this was done
after holding series of talks with the union
government with the explanation that the
movement has achieved the purpose of impressing
on the government the urgent
necessity of tackling the problem. The objective
was the removal of Sheikh Abdullah
and his replacement with a more pliable
leadership.

When speaking before the J and K CA on
October 31, 1951 Sheikh Abdullah referred
to "certain tendencies ... asserting themselves
in India that may in future convert it into
a religious state wherein the interests of the
Muslims will be jeopardised ... if a communal
organisation had a dominant hand
in the Government ..." \[M J Akbar, 1991,
p. 142\]. There was an immediacy attached to
this concern. The new Congress president
elected in September 1951 --- P D Tandon ---
was considered communal even by Nehru.
Rafi Ahmad Kidwai resigned from the party
in protest against communalism within.
Also in Indian ruling circles there was sympathy
for the Dogra _Maharaja_ who was
identified with the majority Hindu community
and suspicion of NC.

In this surcharged climate the interference
of the union government through 'friendly
advice' accentuated the drift. In retrospect
the Delhi Agreement, 1952 which maintained
that "sovereignty in all matters other than
those specified in the Instrument of Accession
continues to reside in the State ... (and)
residuary powers ... vested in the (J and K)
State itself", was not meant to be taken
seriously. It was an attempt to buy time in
order that the NC leadership of Sheikh
Abdullah could be handled.

Sheikh Abdullah was arrested on August 8, 1953.
Not only was Sheikh's government
refusing to follow 'advice' but was also moving
in the direction of independence. The
arrest took place just days before Sheikh
Abdullah had called a meeting to review the
situation arising out of the internal instability
due to the unresolved question of
Kashmir's future. In the four proposals
which an eight-member committee was to
consider the common thread in all the four
was the choice of independence \[A G
Noorani, 1964, p. 63\]. It was this choice of
independence which disturbed Indian
leadership since they otherwise showed no
reluctance to discuss with Pakistan the future
of Kashmir. Within a fortnight of Sheikh's
arrest the prime ministers of these two countries
met and reaffirmed their commitment
to plebiscite. In fact Nehru is said to have
warned the NC leaders, on hearing about
their plans to accept the choice of independence,
that neither India nor Pakistan could
permit independent Kashmir on their
borders and that he was prepared to offer
Kashmir to Pakistan rather than have a
perpetual centre of pressure and international
intrigue on its borders \[N N Raina,
1988, p. 212--3\]. Therefore, two days before
the scheduled cabinet meeting to finalise the
proposal he was arrested along with number
of his colleagues, and his deputy appointed
in his place.

Within less than a year a pliable J and K
government allowed the central government
to usurp authority through two key mechanisms:

(1) The J and K Constitution (Amendment)
Act 1954 deleted Section 75 of the J and
K Constitution Act 1939 which had
made the council of ministers the final
interpreters of the Constitution. Thereby
the _Sadar-i-Riyasat_, i.e., the governor acquired
this power.
(2) Constitution (Application to J and K)
Order 1954 was issued by the president
whereby the jurisdiction of the centre
was extended from the original three subjects
of defence, foreign affairs and communication
to all subjects on the union
list along with the residuary powers.

These went against the very first provision
of the Delhi Agreement (July 24, 1952)
which gave J and K a special position
within the Indian union by conceding that
"sovereignty in all matters other than those
specified in the Instrument of Accession
continues to reside in the state" \[A S Anand,
1980, p. 149\]. What is interesting to note is
that this 1954 order extending the powers of
Indian government included two important
provisions. Firstly it outlawed any activity
which disclaims, questions or disrupts the
"sovereignty and territorial integrity of
India". Secondly any "insult to the Indian
National Flag, the Indian National Anthem
and this Constitution" is deemed to be a
treasonable act.[^/15] A month prior to this on
April 13, 1954 customs barrier was removed
and J and K became economically an integral
part of India.[^/16]

The changes brought about by deposing
Sheikh Abdullah in 1953 are far too significant
to be dismissed as faulty handling of
the situation by the government. One after
another various symbols of Kashmiri autonomy
and self-identity were attacked. Even
before the J and K Constitution was adopted
by a truncated CA through presidential
orders in 1954, the Indian administration acquired
legal cover for turning 'friendly advice'
into decree. Subsequent years saw extension
of Article 312 in 1958 bringing J and
K under All India Services. By January 1965
Articles 356 and 357 enabling the centre to
bring the state under governor's rule without
the consent of the state legislature was made
applicable for J and K. And in 1986 governor
Jagmohan 'concurred' to the centre's extension
of Article 249 enabling parliament
to legislate even on matters in the state list
on the strength of a Rajya Sabha resolution.

The implication of the Indian government's
stand on hindsight appears to mean
that if the NC chose to join Pakistan or
become independent, India would not accept
it. However, if the Indian government was
permitted to assimilate J and K into India
then the union government would not bother
too much about legal niceties and international
rules.

# POINT --- COUNTERPOINT

The manner in which a government handles
various situations does influence the course
of events. But a course which is adopted or
not adopted is not a matter of personal
whim or desire. Every situation carries
within it a number of possibilities, albeit
within the parameters set by the situation.
For instance in 1948 the CA rejected the
demand for linguistic states but by 1956
demand for linguistic states were conceded,
only after agitations for linguistic states
gathered momentum. Compared to the relative
ease with which this demand was accepted
it is remarkable that the demand for
Punjabi Suba had to wait for another 11
years. And this was done in a form that
created new conflicts. What stands out is the
difference in the handling of the two. It was
as if two different yardsticks were being applied
depending upon the proximity to the
'mainstream'.[^/17]

As far as Kashmir is concerned two acts
of parliament are particularly relevant. Firstly
in 1963 through the 16th Amendment to
the Constitution all candidates were obliged
to take an oath to uphold the 'integrity of
India'. It was this provision which was used
to rig the Kashmir elections in 1967 when
the returning officer prevented the opposition
candidates from taking oath. Secondly
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act
1966 held that anything 'which is intended
or supports any claim to bring about on any
ground whatsoever the cession of a part of
the territory of India or the secession of a
part of the territory of India from the
Union, or which incites any individual or
group of individuals to bring about such cession
or secession' is deemed to be unlawful.
This act was used to ban the Plebiscite Front
in 1971.

Each new situation narrowed the possibilities
for accommodation, Independence,
became a credible alternative only when prospects
of internal autonomy for Kashmir
within India receded. It was as though every
new situation reduced whatever chances
there were for working out a solution within
the political boundaries of India. The overwhelming
majority which Sheikh Abdullah
received in 1977, the only election considered
fair, confirms that separation was not the
only possibility available then.

But the qualitative break appeared in 1953
since this set a new pattern of relations where
more than elsewhere in India the central
government took direct control and above
all by robbing AJKNC of its credibility
among the Kashmiris. It should not be
forgotten that the arrest of Sheikh Abdullah
led to widespread agitation. Hundreds were
arrested and between 30--800 killed. By 1954
the state legislature 'for reasons of security'
was empowered to impose restrictions on
basic political rights. It deserves to be mentioned
that the protagonists of forced merger
did not bother to demand extension of Articles
19--22 of Indian Constitution embodying
fundamental rights to J and K until 1979
\[A G Noorani, 1991, p. 22\].

Throughout 1953--75, despite repression
the movement for plebiscite and for the
release of Sheikh Abdullah continued. It was
the popularity of the demand that made it
necessary for every election --- barring the one
in 1977 --- to be rigged with parties supporting
plebiscite not permitted to participate.

The major setback suffered by NC was
when Sheikh Abdullah signed the agreement
with Indira Gandhi in 1975. India's 'victory'
against Pakistan in 1971 and subsequent
developments had persuaded Sheikh Abdullah
to negotiate a settlement. While it
enabled him to return as the chief minister
having once been the _Wazir-i-Azam_ it also
won him assurance that all acts and ordinances
issued after his arrest in 1953 were
to be reviewed. In return Sheikh Abdullah
was to accept that J and K was an integral
part of India. Interestingly the agreement
was never tabled before the parliament.
Review of all acts and ordinances also never
took place.

What compounded the problem was the
replacement of NC government led by
Farooq Abdullah in 1984 followed by the
NC's alliance with the Congress(I) and its
return to power through rigged elections.

One characteristic of the post-independent
Indian state is that it is indifferent to
peaceful agitation. As a result throughout
the 1950s, 60s, and 70s unarmed struggles
were contained through sheer brute force.
But militancy commenced in the valley in 1988.
As a result although the security forces
are present in large numbers they no longer
enjoy a monopoly of violence. What is
notable is that the presence of militants has
enabled the civilian population to begin a
no-tax campaign. Beginning 1989 with
refusal to clear electricity bills it has now
snowballed into civil disobedience with people
simply refusing to pay taxes and tariffs.
Thus, for instance receipts on account of
electricity dropped from 21.86 _crore_ in
1988--89 to 14.42 _crore_ in 1989--90. The
sales tax department found its revenue
reduced from 23.50 _crore_ in 1989--90 to
10.06 _crore_ in 1990--91 while the income
tax department has stopped functioning.[^/18]

It is argued that several other states share
in varying degrees the experience of J and K
and yet not all exhibit secessionist tendencies.
But some of the areas where
separation is demanded share one essential
feature with Kashmir --- they do not conform
to the self-image of mainstream in India. In
other words they do not conform to the image
of Hindu in one or several respects.
Nevertheless, even amongst them there are
differences. The Kashmir issue is associated
with partition and Kashmir shares common
borders with Pakistan. Kashmir's Muslim
majority status allowed the divide brought
about by partition to persist. In other words
for official nationalism it was a constant
reminder of the 'other'. Besides, Kashmir was
used both to question the 'two nation' theory
of AIML as well as to disguise the Hinduness
of India.

On the other hand at the level of oppositional
politics throughout the past four
decades, there has not been any concerted allIndia
protest or show of solidarity with the
Kashmiri people. The same cannot be said
for the RSS and its fronts which have
periodically agitated to demand merger,
abrogation of Article 370; imposition of
military rule, and made unfounded allegations
about persecution of non-Muslims,
destruction of temples, etc. Not only have
they be taken seriously, governments of the
day have lent credibility to these allegations.
Indeed, it is an indication of the concern of
the Indian liberal and left intelligentsia that
they have not hesitated in expressing solidarity
with Kashmiri Pandits but tempered every
criticism of criminal violence of the security
forces with condemnation of the 'Islamic
fundamentalism' or 'communal secessionists'
in Kashmir.

# CONCLUSION

What is important is to note how a desire
for co-existence in relative peace and stability
changed into conflict in J and K. It would
not be an exaggeration to suggest that had
referendum taken place in 1947--48 the majority
of the Kashmiris would have voted along
with the AJKNC. Today it is felt that NC
has contributed to the making of the tragedy
that has befallen the Kashmiri Muslims. Not
only did the AJKNC ask for Indian military
assistance in 1947 but in the war of 47--48
AJKNC actively participated. But the union
government scuttled this move.

It was the democratic perspective behind
the appeal of '_Naya Kashmir_' programme
which had brought about a convergence of
interests of the AJKNC and INC. Whereas
for the NC it offered a possibility of coexistence
and stability to undertake major
reforms. For INC the accession of Kashmir
into India was used to question the two nation'
theory of AIML. In so far as Kashmir's
accession into India weakened the rationale
for creation of Pakistan to that degree at
least Kashmiri people's drift away from India
amounts to questioning the secular democratic
credentials of official nationalism. It
is then pertinent to propose that the root of
the problem lies in defining Indianness in
a way that ruling class interests become
coterminous with national interests and nation
becomes coterminous with a religious
community. A two-way process. (I am
reminded of an issue that embittered, relations
between the AIML and INC when
working together in the Interim Government
in 1947. The then finance minister Liaqat
Ali Khan in his budget proposals recommended
a 25% tax on all business profits
of more than 1 _lakh_. "This was interpreted
in congress circles", says VP Menon,
"as an attempt to penalise the Hindu
capitalists and to bring about dissension
among the right wing and the socialist group
within the Congress party" \[S K Chaube,
1973, p. 69\]).

In most Indian writings, however, the
characterisation of the movement in Kashmir
as communal and fundamentalist proceeds
from the argument that the Kashmiri Pandits
are being hounded out of Kashmir and
since they do not share the desire for referendum
the demand cannot be 'nationalist'
since nationalism is a secular identity. The
contrary is however true. Nationalism is not
the opposite of religious identity. The point
of commonality is not just the religious zeal.
The point is that every 'imagined political
community' defines itself on one or more
ethnic category. In India for instance the notion
of 'unity in diversity' of culture is said
to be the basis of Indian nationalism. Admittedly
much more is made of unity than
diversity. And even the diversities are so
understood that they end up appearing to
be variations of essentially the same. Therefore,
the constant refrain of tracing the
lineage of the Indian nation-state to a particular
Hindu remote past. Needless to add
that even this Hindu is a construction
\[Romila Thapar, May 1989\].

But what is even more interesting is that
the by and large Hindus of the valley do not
share a consciousness of common interests
and therefore faced with their disproportionately
high representation in government
services, especially the higher one moves up,
a divide emerges with the Hindus refusing
to acknowledge this fact. To add to this is
the steady refrain of alleged discrimination
and persecution when in actual fact between
1947--90 there had been few incidents of communal
violence. On the other hand, despite
sharing commonalities once they subsumed
their identities in the notion of Indian
nationalism they became the votaries of imposed
merger at once removing themselves
from their fellow Kashmiris. And despite being
minuscule their identification with the
Indian nation on religio-cultural grounds
made them repositories of the particular
fabrication of Indianness. To this must be
added the impact of a spate of riots through
the 1960s, 70s and 80s. In fact the changing
pattern of violence against the minorities in
the 1980s with the active participation of the
agencies of the state helped accentuate the
differences along lines of religious community.
This only highlights the move to legitimise
the role of religion as a cohesive factor
for identity formation.

It is interesting to note that in the spread
of the Hindu '_rashtra-rajya_' notion, the role
played by Kashmir has been quite substantial.
When the Jana Sangh was formed,
SP Mookerjee drew the attention of delegates
to two issues: the special relationship of
Kashmir with India and the condition of
Hindus in East Bengal. And the manifesto
of the party floated by RSS focused on
'_bhartiya_ culture', 'hindi as link language',
'full integration of J and K', and denial of
safeguards for minorities \[Andersen and
Damle, 1987, pp. 188--9\]. If these are reflected
in the Indian government's relations with
Kashmir and the making of the Constitution,
shorn of the vitriolic verbiage, the convergence
is not mere co-incidence.

The concern for the interests of the nonMuslims
exhibited by the union government,
the erosion of autonomy, treating J and K
as a rebellious province through frequent
change of government leaders, dismissal of
governments and imposition of direct rule,
all these find sustenance in the notions of
union, language policy, safeguards for
minorities, reforming and to that extent protecting
Hindu society and the peculiarities
of godly secularism[^/19] practised in India. In
their turn all these provide the 'source credibility'
\[Dipankar Gupta, July 1985,
pp. 218--20\] for the alienation of Kashmiri
from India and thus the demand for exercising
right of self-determination.


[^/1]:_Indian Express_ (Delhi), May 8 and 11, 1991.


[^/2]:Benedict Anderson says "from about the
middle of the nineteenth century there
developed ... official nationalisms inside
Europe. These nationalisms were historically
'impossible' until after the appearance of
popular linguistic-nationalism for at bottom,
they were responses by power-groups ---
primarily, but not exclusively, dynastic and
aristocratic --- threatened with exclusion
from, or marginalisation in popular imagined
communities ... Such official nationalisms
were conservative, not to say reactionary,
policies adapted from the model of the
largely spontaneous popular nationalisms
that preceded them ... Nor were they
ultimately confined to Europe and the Levant".
Benedict Anderson, _Imagined Communities
Reflections on the Origin and
spread of Nationalism_; Verso, 1983, p. 102.


[^/3]:It is interesting that in July 1947 the
_Memorandum on the Indian Constitution_
held that "'India' has been suggested for
the name of the State as being the shortest
and the most comprehensive" \[FIC, Volume
I, _ibid_., p. 575\]. And as late as during
February--October 1948 the substitution of
'India' with 'Bharatbarsa' was rejected on
the ground that the term 'India' has not
only been in "current use for well over a century
and a half but is also well known in
the international world. It is not therefore
advisable to change it to 'Bharatbarsa'
throughout the Draft (Constitution)". See
_Comments and Suggestions on Draft Constitution_, \[FIC, volume IV, _ibid_., p. 6\].
However by September 17, 1949 an amendment
was moved and accepted which
declared "India, that is Bharat, shall be a
Union of States". No explanation was offered
for its inclusion. Sce \[FIC, A Study,
p. 142\].


[^/4]:See _Indian Express_ (Delhi), September 12,
1991 for BJP leader A B Vajpayee's contention
that the ruler of Kashmir joined India
of his 'free will' and therefore if some people
are now unhappy, they can go away
where they want, but another division of
the country cannot be tolerated.


[^/5]:In this connection it is interesting to note
what AIML and INC had to say in 1947
with division imminent on their respective
positions on the status of the princely states.
AIML in a statement issued on July 30,
1947 held that "with the lapse of paramountcy
... all Indian States would
automatically regain full sovereign and independent
status. They are therefore free to
join either of the two Dominions or to remain
independent. "INC thought otherwise.
The AICC resolution issued on June
15, 1947 held that lapse (of paramountcy)
does not lead to the independence of the
States" Besides "people of the States must
have a dominating voice in any decisions
regarding them ...", see \[A G Noorani
(1964), pp. 22--23\].


[^/6]:"Kashmir is, undoubtedly, that is legally
speaking, historically speaking, constitutionally
speaking, a part of India, a part
of the Union of India", said Nehru in an
interview published in the _Journal of the
Indo--Japanese Association_, July--November
1957, quoted in _India the Siege Within_,
Penguin, London 1985, pp. 244--5.


[^/7]:There was "little difficulty in settling the
other two Lists: they (CA) decided to adopt
generally the Provincial and Concurrent
legislative Lists of the Government of India
Act 1935". In fact Gopalswamy Ayyangar
affirmed that the sphere assigned to provinces
in the 1935 Act was not encroached
upon and that only the Federal List was
enlarged. See B Shiva Rao, 1968, pp. 609--11.


[^/8]:In the north-eastern Indian state of
Arunachal Pradesh "it has been the conscious
policy of the Centre and state government
to promote Hinduism and Hindi
language in order to bring it close to the
'mainstream'", (_The Times of India_, August
1991). Neither any political party nor any
newspaper has bothered to comment or demand
an explanation. Besides, the identification
of Hindi with Indianness and Urdu
as an alien language was to result in abolition
of nomenclatures such as _Wazir-i-Azam_
and _Sadr-i-Riyasat_ by 1967. And in January
1990 Kashmiri language was divested of
terms with Persian origin to be replaced
with sanskritic _rashtrapati_, _pradhan mantri_, etc., _The Statesman_ (Delhi), January 19, 1990.


[^/9]:In this connection the moves by the BJP
against the Bihar government's proposal to
make the Minorities Commission a statutory
body is interesting. BJP says that this move
is "unconstitutional" and "will make it (the
Minorities Commission) a state within a
state. It will be a parallel government --- a
government of the Muslims, by the Muslims
and for the Muslims". _The Times of India_,
September 2, 1991. What is interesting is
that the central government's proposal announced
on September 4, 1991 to give
statutory powers to the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes Commission along
the same lines has met with no such
ludicrous characterisation.


[^/10]:In this context what Ambedkar wrote in his
memorandum is relevant even today: "To
make religious affiliation the determining
factor for constitutional safeguards is to
overlook the fact that the religious affiliation
may be accompanied by an intense
degree of social separation and discrimination
... Muslims are given separate electorates
not because they are different from
Hindus in point of religion. They are given
separate electorates because --- and this is the
fundamental fact --- social relations between
the Hindus and the Musalmans are marked
by social discrimination. To put the point
in a somewhat different manner, the nature
of the electorates is determined not by the
reference to religion but by reference to
social considerations". _Memorandum and
Draft Articles on the Rights of States and
Minorities_ dated March 24, 1947. FIC,
Volume II, p. 109.


[^/11]:The union home ministry in a communication
dated December 29, 1983 claimed that
conversion of Muslim members of "Cheeta,
Merhat and Kathat communities living in
district Ajmer ... was reaffirmation of faith".
On the other hand it adds, "all precautionary
measures have been taken to prevent
Adi Dravidars being converted to
become Muslims". _Muslim India_ (Delhi),
Vol II, No 1, January 1984, p. 55.


[^/12]:The debate on Muslim Women's Bill in 1986
is a poignant reminder of how a minority
was disabled and how this disablement was
used to appease votaries of _Hindu rashtra_.
See my 'Muslim Maintenance Bill: A
Postscript' in _Economic and Political
Weekly_, September 20--27, 1986, pp. 1691--92.
_See also_ my comment 'Ruling Party's
Defence of Muslim Women's Bill' in _Social
Scientist_, June 1986, Volume 15, No 6,
pp. 55--58.


[^/13]:The CPI said in 1948: "The question of accession
must be decided by the democratic
verdict of the whole Kashmir people", see
N N Raina, 1988, p. 205.


[^/14]:It is worth noting that in freeing the tiller
from the unbearable dependence on the
landlord and removing the non-economic
oppression there was in the years thereafter
development of surplus producing farmers.
With the pressure on land increasing there
was no growth in other productive investments
especially in industry. The first major
public sector investment took place in the
1980s. Of course the argument extended was
that J and K is a border state. But denial
of industrial licence to Kashmir as in the
case of Punjab deserves closer study,
especially in view of the interventionist role
of the government.


[^/15]:The importance of respect for the national
flag must be understood in the context of
J and K which was permitted use of its own
flag and this became a recurring point of
rancour for the RSS and its sympathisers.
The main slogan of the RSS fronts was "_Ek
desh mein do vidaan, Ek desh mein do
nishaan, ek desh mein do pradhan nahain
chalega, nahin chalega_" (Two constitutions,
two flags and two heads of state in one
country are unacceptable). Therefore, Clause
IV of the Delhi Agreement of 1952 states
that while the state "should have its own
flag ... it was also recognised that the Union
flag should have the same status and position
in Jammu and Kashmir as in the rest
of India" \[A S Anand, 1980, p. 150\]. After
1954 the J and K flag was removed altogether.
The significance of the flag even independent
of this irritant must be noted.
The colours of the flag were described by
the Congress Working Committee resolution
in August 1931 thus: "Saffron shall
represent the courage and sacrifice, white
peace and truth, and green shall represent
faith and chivalry". While explanation for
saffron remained the same during the
debate on national flag in Constituent
Assembly, representing "the spirit of renunciation
... transmitted to us from the beginning
of our history" said Sarvapalli
Radhakrishnan moving the resolution on
the national flag he significantly added that
green represented "Our relation to the soil,
our relation to the plant life here on which
all other life depends" \[FIC, Vol I, pp. 492
and 505\]. What is more RSS describes the
significance of saffron along same lines as
embodying "the colour of the holy sacrificial
fire that gives the message of self-immolation
in the fire of idealism and the
glorious orange hue of the rising sun that
dispels darkness and sheds light all around",
\[Andersen and Damle 1987, p. 93\].


[^/16]:One upshot of this in any case was that
employment in government services acquired
a disproportionately high
significance. But even here there was a
skewed representation with Kashmiri
Muslim employment disproportionately
lower. Indeed, the higher one goes the lower
becomes the presence of Kashmiri Muslims.


[^/17]:"The Congress found itself in a dilemma",
wrote Indira Gandhi, "... to concede the
Akali demand would mean abandoning a
position to which it \[Congress\] was firmly
committed and letting down its Hindu supporters
in the Punjabi Suba", quoted in
Hukam Singh's, 'The Other Side', _Punjab
the Fatal Miscalculation_, Patwant Singh and
Harji Malik (eds), New Delhi 1985.


[^/18]:_The Times of India_ (Delhi), September 2, 1991.


[^/19]:When All India Radio officials decided to
ban recitation of religious texts over AIR,
members of CA took umbrage and AIR
was reminded that "India believes in God
and therefore Indian State must remain a
State of God. It must be a Godly State and
not a Godless State. This is our meaning
of secularity". See _Secular State and Indian
Constitution_ by Robert D Baird, Manohar,
Delhi, 1981, p. 399.

# References

::: {#refs}

Ahmed, Ishtiaq (1990): 'Politics of Ethnic Identity
in Sindh: Changing Perceptions of
Group Identity' (mimeo). Presented at
Seventh Annual Conference of the NASEAS
at Khint holm Havn, Denmark September 30--October 3.

\

Akbar, M J (1991): _Kashmir: Behind the Vale_.
(Viking) Penguin India, Delhi.

\

--------- (1985), _India the Siege Within_, Penguin,
London.

\

Anand, AS (1980): _Development of the Constitution
of Jammu and Kashmir_, Light and
Life Publishers, Delhi.

\

Anderson, Benedict (1983): _Imagined Communities.
Reflections on the Origin and
Spread of Nationalism_, Verso, London.

\

Andersen, Walter and Daml, Shridhar (1987):
_Brotherhood in Saffron: The RSS and Hindu
Revivalism_, Vistaar Publications, New Delhi.

\

Azad, Maulana Abul Kalam (1984): _Indio Wins
Freedom_, Orient Longman, New Delhi.

\

Banerjee, S Bose, T. Mohan, D; and Navlakha
G (1990): _India's Kashmir War_, Committee for
Initiative on Kashmir, New Delhi.

\

Chandra, Prakash (1985): 'National Question in
Kashmir', _Social Scientist_, June.

\

Chaube, S K: _Constitution Assembly of India_,
People's Publishing House, New Delhi.

\

Devnathan (1990): 'From Civilisation to Nations',
Occasional Papers, Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library, November.

\

Gupta, Dipankar (1991): 'Communalism and
Fundamentalism' Some notes on the Nature
of Ethnic Politics in India' (mimeo).

\

--------- (1985): "The Communalising of Punjab:
1980--85, _Economic and Political Weekly_, July 13.

\

Korbel, Josef (1966): _Danger in Kashmir_,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New
Jersey.

\

Menon, VP (1961): _The Story of Integration of
Indian States_, Orient Longman, New Delhi.

\

Noorani, A G (1969): _The Kashmir Question_,
Manaktalas, Bombay.

\

--------- (1991): 'Kashmir Question Revisited' Centre for
Policy Research, New Delhi.

\

Raina, NN (1988): _Kashmir Politics and Imperialist Manoeuvres 1846--1980_, Patriot
Publishers, New Delhi.

\

Rao, B Shiva (1968): "The Framing of India
Constitutions; A Study, Indian Institute of
Public Administration, New Delhi.

\

--------- (1968): 'The Framing of India's Constitution;
Four Volumes of Select Documents, LIPA,
New Delhi.

\

Sarkar, Sumit (1983): _Modern India 1885--1947_,
Macmillan, New Delhi.

\

Thapar, Romnila (1989): 'Imagined Religious Communities? Ancient History and Search for
Hindu Identity', _Modern Asian Studies_, May,
Vol 23 Part 2.

:::
