_Given the near-visionary resonance of Periyar's life work, it becomes somewhat difficult to separate his political
and social legacy. But though his vision has been politicised, made to bear witness to a non-brahmin and, in
some instances, a Tamil will to power, it, yet, resists a complete co-optation into politics. It intimates to the
interlocutor of today an abiding ethic which is not at all explicable in terms of quotidian politics. It is this ethic
which is the subject of this paper and an attempt is made to explore it for the lessons it may hold out for contemporary
feminist debate and practice._

\ 

My paper is not about independent India.
It seemed to me that the progress or retardation
of the women question in independent India
cannot be grasped, unless one possesses a
complex and nuanced understanding of the
events that lead to the exit of the British from
this subcontinent. Such an understanding
cannot merely veer between the elite and
subaltern versions of Indian nationalism, but
would have to actively engage with the
histories and ideologies of social and political
movements whose founding premises were
not, in fact, are not definable within the terms
of Indian nationalism. I propose to examine
aspects of such a history, a history that will
enable us re-inscribe the context and content
of independence as well as make for a
different and more imaginative engagement
with contemporary feminist concerns.

I look here at aspects of the _Self-Respect
Movement_, a radical _anti-caste_ movement,
begun by E V Ramasamy Periyar in 1925,
and which convulsed the Tamil country into
eruptions of defiance, anger and subversion
for the next two decades. Later, Periyar's
movement suffered several mutations. The
Dravidar Kazhagam (DK) was formed in
1944 by Periyar himself, and the Dravida
Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) in 1949, by a
group of men who were dissatisfied with the
DK. Both organisations continue to be vocal
and active in Tamil politics today. However,
it seems to me that in different ways, both
have compromised and even reneged on
the founding ideals of the _Self-Respect
Movement_. This is so, particularly, with
reference to the women's question, the
resolution of which was quite central to the
_self-respecters_' _anti-caste_ agenda. While
some formal victories have been secured
meanwhile, such as the legalisation of _self-respect
marriages_, which desacralised
marriage and re-defined it as a contract for
living together, and the securing of women's
rights to property in law --- both of which
were made into law, when the DMK was in
power previously --- there have been no other
substantial achievements. The DK continues
to affirm the importance of securing women's
rights and liberation as part of its
"consciousness raising" politics, but its
gestures in this matter have proved more
formal than substantive, more a repetition
of time-worn ideas rather than imaginative
interventions in the debates and struggles
currently being carried out by women's
groups. There are individuals, in and out of
the party, who continue to affiliate themselves
with Periyar's ideas on gender and work
around rights issues, but the DK as an
organisation plods along in a well rehearsed
path.

But then history works its effects in curious
ways. For one, historical change does not
always follow a linear path and, secondly,
the past catches up with the present in very
many unexpected ways; so much so that to
reclaim an inheritance, one feels impelled
to begin, not from the formal, official legacy
which often serves the political and strategic
interests of the particular ruling group in
question, but from a chosen point of arrival,
and then loop around the present to connect
up with the past. For me, the point of arrival
of an interesting and relevant legacy is the
present, a present, dominated by interesting
debates in women's groups --- in Tamil Nadu
 --- on the complex and fraught relationship
between gender and caste on one hand, and
a dalit political militancy on the other. It is
from this present moment that I wish to
interrogate a past which I think speaks to
contemporary feminist concerns and
anxieties, especially to those who are engaged
in debating questions of identity and
community and exploring the possibilities
of justice for women in a social context,
where neither law nor community, in themselves,
seem to be able to guarantee women
their fundamental rights.

E V Ramasamy Periyar died in 1973. He
was 95. Two years before his death, he
explained his life's work thus:

>Though I have endeavoured all along to
>abolish caste, as far as this country is
>concerned, this has meant I carry out
>propaganda for the abolition of god, religion,
>the shastras and brahmins. For caste will
>disappear only when these four disappear.
>Even if one of these were to remain, caste
>will not be abolished in its entirety ... because
>caste has been constructed out of these
>four ... only after man has become a slave and
>a fool would caste have thus been imposed
>on society. [^1]

Periyar viewed his life's mission as nothing
less than millennial and constantly sought
to locate the new citizen he wished to
constitute in an anticipated utopia. The future
was everything and the present and past
were important, in as far as they could be
subjected to careful scrutiny by a watchful,
yet, ironic reason, which looked to sift, from
these times, moments of rational, intelligent
worth, moments which were to usher in the
millennium.

Given the near-visionary resonance which
Periyar brought to his life's work, it becomes
somewhat difficult to separate his political
and social legacy from his prophetic world
view. This may seem a somewhat surprising
observation, since there have been and there
are several political movements and parties
which claim Periyar for their own; which
seek to place him at the origins of a distinctive
politics of nation and caste, defined in and
through the terms of what may be termed
a non-brahmin exceptionalism. But though
Periyar's vision has been thus politicised,
made to bear witness to a non-brahmin and,
in some instances, a Tamil will to power,
it, yet, resists a complete co-optation into
politics; remains stubborn in its autonomy,
intimating to the interlocutor of today, the
presence of an abiding ethic which is not at
all explicable in terms of quotidian politics
and its constitutive ideology --- electoral
democracy.

It is this ethic which is the subject of this
paper: I hope to explore it for the lessons
and the inspiration it may hold out for
contemporary feminist debates and practice.
It seems to me that this ethic, which, I believe,
has survived politics, even at the risk of
being marginalised by it, speaks to feminists
today with an urgent appeal.

# PLACING PERIYAR

From his earliest days in public life, Periyar
was wary and contemptuous of politics, the
realm of power, contention, manipulation
and machinations, of office, honours and
authority. When he launched the _Self-Respect
Movement_ in 1925, he consciously chose to
work in, what we today, refer to as civil
society. Then, this was a restricted space, held
captive to colonialist 'native' intelligentsia.
This colonial subject, male, upper caste and
middle class, on his way to becoming a
nationalist, dominated civic life in the Tamil
country, as elsewhere: a civic life, devoted
to ideas, agitations, meetings, mobilisation
of men and resources and which engaged the
colonial state in a vigorous dialogue, confronting
it with its professed commitment to
progress and freedom. These articulate and
earnest men fashioned for themselves a sober,
solemn subjectivity, anticipating an ideal of
citizenhood, which, in the years to come,
would find its most lofty expression in the
Constitution of free India. But in the 1920s
and 1930s, this ideal was only in the making
and was subject to the attractions of that
curious admixture of politics and piety, which
Gandhi embodied in his person and utilised to
justify his practice. The colonialist (nationalist)
subject's dream of a modern, free nation
was riddled with fantasy and nostalgia,
elements which were crucial to Gandhi's
vision of free India --- of a _Hind Swaraj_.

Periyar, iconoclastic, sensitive to caste as
a system of inequality and cruelty, was
initially a fellow traveller with these dreamers
of modern India: he was much influenced
by the Gandhi of the mid and late-1920s,
inspired by the ideals of non-cooperation
and constructive work. However, he inflected
the Gandhian ideal in his own terms. As he
wrote in the very first issue of his remarkable
weekly, _Kudi Arasu_:

>A sense of _self-respect_ and fraternity must
>arise within human society. Notions of high
>and low amongst men should disappear. A
>sense of the unity of all humankind must
>dawn in each of us. Communal confrontations
>must cease to be. In the course of propagating
>these ideals, we will not hesitate to take on
>friend or foe if they range themselves against
>us and criticise us through word and deed[^2]

Periyar's re-reading of Gandhi was
particularly evident in his definition of untouchability.
It is clear from his pronouncements
of this period that he held the abolition
of untouchability to be contingent on the attainment
of _self-respect_ by the '_adi dravidas_'.
Thus, he would imprecate, rage, cajole and
persuade _adi dravidas_ to fight an oppression
which inhered as much in their felt lowliness,
as it did in those social and economic
structures which utilised their labour and
cast them aside as untouchable \[_Kudi Arasu_,
May 24, 1925; June 21, 1925\]. Periyar also
made it clear that the liberation of other non-brahmin
castes lay in the liberation of the
_adi dravidas_ \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:404\]. This
_anti-caste_, egalitarian vision sustained
Periyar's work and thought, even after he
broke faith with Gandhi. This happened in
1927, after Gandhi had expressed at a public
meeting in Mysore, his faith in the norms
of '_varna-dharma_'. Periyar had been uneasily
aware of Gandhi's peculiarly convoluted
arguments about caste and untouchability.
and _Kudi Arasu_ carried a courteous but
firmly-voiced criticism of Gandhi's stance
in this respect in late 1925. The critic, one
Pandit Dharma Deva Siddhanta Alangarar,
had remarked that by endorsing '_varna_'
differences, Gandhi was creating obstacles
in the way of the one objective dear to his
heart --- the abolition of untouchability \[_Kudi
Arasu_, September 13, 1925\].

After 1927, Periyar undertook a systematic,
relentless campaign against the Mahatma's
politics of piety on the one hand and on the
other hand, chose to work in those very
spaces Gandhi had recognised as pertinent,
both for the transformation of Hindu (and
by implication, Indian) subjectivity and the
dawning of _Hind Swaraj_. These were spaces
constituted by the interlinked realms of
consciousness, communication, sexuality and
identity. To re-work and reclaim these spaces
for a radical utopia, Periyar founded the
_Self-Respect Movement_ in 1925 and worked
hard to advance a counter to both the lures
of the Gandhian Congress as an institution
and nationalism as an ideology. He rejected
the latter's claims as the ethic of our times
and chose, instead, to create a social and
cultural movement of revolt --- against caste,
brahminism, religion and the rule of men
over women. Periyar's antagonism as well
as affiliation to Gandhi need to be understood
if we are to map the co-ordinates of his
distinctive ethic. Besides, Periyar's life, world
view, practice and ideas represent, in their
complex articulation with one another, an
experience, a consciousness, a politics that
modern India did not choose and, as such,
indicate choices which the so-called makers
of modern Indian consciously eschewed and
actively cast aside.

Where Gandhi looked to an abiding and
deeply felt religious faith, experienced by
him, at least, as an ineffable inner voice, an
instruction from a morally sensitive
conscience, to sustain political and social
activism, Periyar trusted to reason. Defined
by him as an intelligence which sought to
splice apart and critically examine all sorts
of phenomena, this reason existed in his
lexicon as an adjunct of a fearless, questioning
self; which was determined to claim its
autonomy and dignity in a society which,
for centuries, had subjected either to the
brahmin's cunning power, divisions of caste
and to notions of intellectual and ethical
lowliness. Describing his epistemology, as
it were, he once observed that he had always
tried to go beyond appearances to get at the
truth behind phenomena. As far as he was
concerned, it was his power of rationality
which helped him do this \[_Anaimuthu_
1974:2009\]. It was for this reason that Periyar
praised and upheld the example set by the
Buddha. He remarked that the Buddha had
counselled men to use their minds and follow
the dictates of their intelligence. He had also
asked men to exercise their freedom to reject
what their rational minds could not
comprehend or accept, such as heaven, hell,
salvation, and differences between human
beings, such as brahmin, shudra and
panchama \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:307\].

What was 'truth' to Gandhi, directing him
to offer satyagraha in various instances was
sophistry to Periyar; for, as he observed, the
'truths' which the Mahatma claimed for his
own cannot be considered given and
universal. For Periyar, truth was essentially
relative and subjective and he did not imagine
that there existed a surefire test that would
help one ascertain what was truth and what
was not in any given instance. The 'triumph
of truth' Periyar argued, represented, more
often than not, a triumph of cunning and
authority. For one was as likely to submit
to a regimen of truth, as to be convinced of
it. For his own ideas, Periyar made no absolute
claims and insisted they were to be accepted
or discarded by subjecting them to rational
and critical scrutiny at various moments in
time. If Gandhi rested his truth' in a
transcendence he believed to exist, Periyar
refused to rest his arguments in anything,
but the claims of the oppressed in the here
and now \[_Kudi Arasu_, September 6, 1931\].

Where Gandhi demanded penitence and
sacrifice, as for example, with the practice
of untouchability, and insisted that only a
morally active and repentant self can bring
about social reform, Periyar advocated
resistance and struggle, often urging his self-respecters
to bring to the fore, those
antagonisms and contradictions in caste
society and act on them. This was particularly
evident in Periyar's remonstrance to the _adi
dravidas_. Rather than appeal to their felt
lowliness, he sought to provoke their sense
of defiance and anger. He upbraided them
for referring to upper caste men as 'swamis',
and for letting themselves be convinced that
their physical condition --- of dirt, ill-health
and sickness --- was because they had not
worked enough to lift themselves out of their
misery \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:56\]. He implored
to look to and understand the system which
required their labour and therefore kept them
confined to a position of abject lowliness
\[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:71--72\].

Where Gandhi communicated through
complex metaphors drawn from the language
of faith and devotion, appealing to the
meditative self, Periyar spoke as a pedagogue,
a teacher, who sought to expound ideas and
encourage discussion, debate and dialogue.
Periyar was given to concluding his addresses
with an entreaty: His listeners were to think
through whatever they had heard at the
meeting and decide for themselves if there
were reason and justice in the things which
had been told them.

Where Gandhi looked to Tolstoy --- the
righteous prophet, Periyar invoked Socrates;
to the 'ashram' with its experiments in truth,
was counterpoised the '_agora_', that public
and civic space to which all manner of people
could claim access and rights. The _Self-Respect
Movement_ in fact caused the _agora_
to come into existence for hundreds or
ordinary people; _adi dravidas_ and women
not only attended _self-respect_ meetings in
large numbers, but took part and addressed
the movement's several conferences.

Gandhi's piety and transcendence committed
him and the Indian National Congress
to a politics which commanded mass
devotion, but, which, in the final analysis,
was dictated by the hegemonic demands of
a multi-layered Congress leadership and the
material interests of a confident and growing
_bourgeoisie_ \[Ghosh 1989; 1995\]. Periyar's
reason and commitment to the _agora_ of the
here and now left him with a constituency
that was shifting, and which existed as a
whole only in terms of that large and complex
non-brahmin historic bloc which Periyar attempted
to build and re-build. Sometimes this bloc
appeared divided and internally inconsistent,
as when rich non-brahmins found themselves
being criticised for their class biases by
young _self-respecters_ committed to socialism.
At other times, there ensued arguments
between believers and atheists, between those
who were convinced of the cultural worth
of Saivism and those who felt all religious
ideas and institutions were inexorably
brahminical. Yet, Periyar's Catholic non-brahminism
and his _anti-caste_ mission held
this unwieldy bloc together, especially at
those strategic and crucial moments, when
the larger interests of all non-brahmins were
at stake, as during the anti-Hindi agitations
and when the Congress ministry --- formed
after the 1935 elections --- tried to impose an
educational system that would allow
youngsters to practise the caste vocation
of their fathers. For Gandhi, for all that
piety and faith, the here and now of politics
proved determinate, whereas for Periyar,
committed to the present and scorning
transcendence, the future seemed to hold
infinite promises.

Gandhi imaged the socially conscious and
active subject of history as a devout upper
caste Hindu, essentially noble and pious,
who, of his own volition, would surrender
his privileges and usher in change, conferring,
as it were, equality and _self-respect_ on those
whom, until recently, he had imposed his
logic of difference and exclusion. This subject
was to attain his own in history through a
conscious re-making of his subjectivity
through specificacts of penance and sacrifice.
He had to discover the untouchable in himself,
suffer his indignity as his own and thereby
cleanse himself of disgust, prejudice, fear
and hatred. Likewise, by spinning, wearing
khadi and working with his hands, he was
to acknowledge and make his own, the labour
and life of the Hindu peasant and weaver.
At another level, he was expected to reexamine
his sexual identity, since it was a
particular deployment of masculinity,
premised on desire, its satiation and the
eruption of desire again, which forced men
to think dark thoughts, bred incontinence in
all aspects of life and, thereby, urged them
onto unethical action. The '_brahmacharya
vrata_', which Gandhi counselled to his male
disciples, why even to Congressmen, rested
on a particular vision of femininity: If men
were to renounce desire, and forswear the
excess and violence which desire propelled
into existence, women had to rework the
terms of conjugality. They were to transform
the passive virtues, conventionally associated
with them, patience, sacrifice, rectitude and
suffering, into active ones and use them in
the cause of the nation. Women, for Gandhi,
were the ideal _satyagrahis_, natural political
subjects in the Gandhian narrative of
_satyagraha_. They were not to bound by their
domesticity, but neither were they do discard
their duties. In effect, they were to assume
responsibility for the nation, as they did for
the home and family.

Periyar worked with and through different
notions of identity and sexuality. For him
the lowest of the low in caste society, _adi
dravidas_ and women, were the natural
subjects of history. But their emancipation
and self-fulfilment in history were possible
only if the entire social order of caste was
stood in its head. That is, Periyar did not
trust to the enabling power of individual
consciousness alone to bring about
transformation. Consciousness war for
him always already collective. Entire
communities of the oppressed, all those non-brahmin
communities which stood shamed
and humiliated by brahminism and caste,
and women everywhere, were to create their
own history, by responding in anger, in
defiance and in unison, in full knowledge
of what held them in thrall to an unjust social
order. On one hand, this meant a renunciation
of caste with all its privileges, an abjuring
of that religious faith which legitimised caste
and a re-making of society along non-hierarchical
lines. On the other hand this
required a re-making of masculine and
feminine subjectivities, so that the much
desired _self-respect_, mutuality and freedom
Periyar sought out as the defining premises
of his utopia, could be grounded in primary
human relationships. Thus, reason and
critique, desire and freedom, mutuality and
reciprocity constellated into a figuration for
Periyar, in which could be traced those new
structures of feeling he wished to cultivate
in his fellow beings. For him, the emergence
of a social order rested as much on such
structures of feeling, as they did on transformed
material structures and social
relationships.

We can make better sense of Periyar's
complex utopian project by looking in some
detail at how his _self-respecters_, especially
women, understood and interpreted his ideas.

# WOMEN, CASTE AND _SELF-RESPECT_

Imprecations against caste and its attendant
horrors were often the subject of many a
woman self-respecter's addresses to
conferences, as well as the articles several
of them wrote for one or the other of the _Self-Respect
Movement_'s journals, _Kudi Arasu_,
_Puratchi_, _Pagutharivu_ and _Samadharmam_.
Women understood caste as not merely a
division of labour and labourers but as a
system which divided women as well. Such
a division secured for some women relative
comfort and security, but also bound them
to ignorance. So much so that these women
persisted in thinking that they were better
off than their lower caste, working class
sisters. Women _self-respecters_ were
particularly critical of nationalist women in
this regard and took great exception to their
entreaties to women to abide by tradition and
serve their nation. Commenting on a meeting
of 'Indian Women' held in Madras, under
the auspices of the Congress, a _Kudi Arasu_
editorial wondered, mirroring, as it were, the
ideas of women _self-respecters_, how
educated, upper caste women could forget
the fact of their subordinate existence and
seek to perpetrate it by invoking conventional
role models, such as Sita, Nalayini,
Chandramathi and Vasugi; women, whose
husband-worship can hardly be considered
worthy of emulation \[_Kudi Arasu_, January
22, 1933\].

In another instance, Minakshi, a regular
contributor to _Kudi Arasu_ urged her
nationalist sisters to practise a different sort
of non-cooperation and civil disobedience.
Rather than picket liquor shops and shops
which sold foreign cloth, they would do well
to picket and boycott the homes of those who
oppose any and every move to a reform of
women's lives; whether these have to do
with the abolition of the '_devadasi_' system
or the rights to education and mobility of
_adi dravida_ women:

>You may offer _satyagraha_, why your very
>life, for the sake of our _devadasi_ sisters who
>are being coerced by their parents into the
>profession of their forebears. Offer
>_satyagraha_ in front of the homes of your
>sisters who disdain to grant our _adi dravida_
>sister's rights of access to the common well ... [^3]

Of lower caste women, it was said that
their lot was toil. In a remarkable article,
titled, "Women and Work', Neelavathi, a
prominent speaker and writer in the _Self-Respect
Movement_ observed that if one were
to leave aside the very rich and privileged
amongst women, who lolled about all day
long and idled their time away, the others
worked --- not merely at housework, but in
"factories, hospitals, in the countryside ... (in)
tailoring, weaving, construction, vending ... "
Women, argued Neelavathi, were however
denied the dignity of being workers, since
society held that work was the mark of a
man. Thus whatever women labourered at
became theirs by destiny. For Neelavathi, it
was important for women as well society to
acknowledge their productive worth. Her
plea that all women, except the idle few, be
considered workers and accorded respect
--- and due wages, even for housework
--- represents a skilful deployment of Periyar's
argument that all non-brahmins or 'shudras'
ought to be considered workers by birth,
since they were denied free and unrestricted
access to all but the most menial of tasks
in caste society \[_Puratchi_ April 29, 1934\].

Periyar had noted: "Just as brahminism
condemns a very large portion of the working
population to _shudrahood_, so it has
condemned women to the servitude of
marriage" \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:178\].
Neelavathi seeks to establish a homology
between women condemned to housework
and childbearing and yet denied the status
of labourers, and shudras condemned to their
caste status (and labour) and denied the
identity of productive workers.

What is important to note here is that while
women like Minakshi reminded their
nationalist peers to be attentive to questions
of caste difference and consider the problems
faced by _devadasis_ and _adi dravida_ women
as equally pertinent to the national struggle,
as, say the boycott of liquor shops, socialist-minded
women like Neelavathi sought to
remind all women of their common fate as
workers in the family. The _self-respecters_
acknowledged the fact that caste divided
women and prevented them from coming to
terms with all those common modes of
oppression to which they were subject under
patriarchy. Yet they also knew that this divide
cannot simply be wished away and that
women had to consciously work at coming
together, rather than assuming that they could,
simply because they were sisters together in
the nationalist struggle.

Women _self-respecters_ resisted caste in
other ways as well: by endorsing _adi dravida_
rights --- to temple entry, to a separate
electorate, to learning; by supporting the
demand for communal representation --- for
all non-brahmins in government and
education --- and by opposing and criticising
the ideology of nationalism, as exemplified
by Gandhi. Kunjitham, an intelligent and
well-read _self-respecter_ met Gandhi, and
questioned him closely about his views on
_varna-dharma_ and caste. She was accompanied
on that occasion by her husband, Gurusamy,
and other _self-respecters_, all of whom were
keenly interested in unravelling the tangle
of piety, politics and pragmatism which lay
at the heart of Gandhi's pronouncements and
practice during this period \[_Puratchi_, January
14, 1934\]. Neelavathi met with Gandhi during
his visit to the Tamil country in 1934 and
interrogated his faith in _varna-dharma_, his
views on the abolition of untouchability and
the place he reserved for religion in public
life \[_Puraichi_, February 18, 1934\].

It must be said here that many _adi dravida_
women were active in the _Self-Respect
Movement_. The most famous and visible
amongst them was Anapoorani, an extremely
well-read, articulate and daring woman who
spoke out on a variety of matters, including
atheism, the repression of caste and the rights
of women. She married A Rathina Sabapathy,
an upper caste non-brahmin, and a socialist
by conviction. Their marriage was considered
by the _Self-Respect Movement_ to be a
major victory over caste and orthodoxy.
Rathina Sabapathy was also in the forefront
of the struggle against the subordination of
women and wrote a fascinating novelle, titled,
_Yezhai Azhutha Kaneer_ (The Tears of the
Poor, 1932), which described a sort of
dystopia, where men were punished for their
sins towards women in the real world and
cast into perdition and eternal suffering.

Perhaps the one significant practical act
which enabled women _self-respecters_ to
speak out boldly against caste, nationalism
and patriarchy was the _self-respect marriage_.
Largely inter-caste, or an instance of a
widow marriage, and deliberately secular,
dispensing, as it did, with the services of the
brahmin priest, the _self-respect marriage_ form
announced to the world at large the arrival
of a new sort of family: trans-caste and
existing as the germ, the primary constituent
of a new, equal community. By rendering
marriage a matter of individual choice and
desire, as well as a social contract, the _self-respect
marriage_ form made the caste Hindu
family appear suddenly vulnerable. With
women deemed free to marry whomsoever
they wished to, the integrity of caste too
stood challenged, since caste identity, centred
in the woman's body and consecrated through
strategies of control and discipline, could
now be exchanged for one that the woman
wished to create for herself --- in freedom,
in _self-respect_ and on the basis of a chosen
reciprocity.

# WOMEN SELF-RESPECTERS AND THEIR CLAIMS ON REASON

For women who, thus, opposed caste, their
new sense of self came to hinge on two
aspects of consciousness: Reason and
mutuality. Reason was interpreted by women
to mean an aspect of a probing, curious and
active intelligence and one which would
enable them unravel the meaning of all those
rituals, customs and everyday practices which
bound them to a life of unknowing and
domestic servitude. Reason was to enable
them question themselves and reflect on the
choices they made, even if these happened
to be merely quotidian ones. As Minakshi
passionately expostulated in the course of
her critique of civil disobedience:

>Sisters, reflect for a moment on the horrors
>you endure in your day-to-day life. You
>borrow money --- because you wish to observe
>a custom, practise a ritual, you borrow for
>a funeral, a pilgrimage ... Consequently,
>poverty, humiliation, debt, police warrant,
>mortgage, the misery that visits your children,
>unbearable sadness and the rebuke of others:
>one follows the other. Why must you do
>this? To preserve a convention, an orthodox
>custom? To appear virtuous in the eyes of
>others? Do you not realise your \[minds\] are
>diseased ... stricken with barbarity and
>afflicted with degenerate rituals ... [^4]

More generally, women would uphold the
claims of reason against the dictates of faith
and religious norms and the rules of tradition.
Thus, Ranganayagi Ammal, speaking at the
Coimbatore district _Self-Respect Conference_,
observed with some exasperation that no
longer can the orthodox and the learned
afford to beguile women by repeating that
'Ignorance becomes a woman'. 'Do not heed
a woman's words'; 'Silence is a woman's
adornment'. Women were now ready to claim
the powers of reasoning for themselves and
were ready to examine not only literary
opinions and reflections on women, but also
inquire into those ill-opinions men held of
women \[_Puratchi_, November 26, 1933\]. D
Rangammal writing in _Puratchi_ drew
attention to the wastefulness of religious
festivals, of the debauchery which
accompanied them and of the plight of young
women in pilgrimage towns, especially
during festival times, when they were teased
and near molested by feckless and rude young
men \[_Puratchi_, January 28, 1934\].

Such questionings of religion and faith
--- and these may be found in all _self-respect_
magazines --- were enabled and inspired by
the _Self-Respect Movement_'s general
recklessness and courage with respect to
matters of faith. Self-respecters were critical
of all religions and refused to accept that
religion and faith could help constitute a
viable identity and community, For strategic
reasons, and in particular contexts, as when
Gandhi and Congress insisted that _adi
dravidas_ were also Hindus, Periyar exhorted
the lower castes to convert to Islam and
secure their freedom and _self-respect_ in a
general Islamic brotherhood. But this was
no general policy and at other times, Islam
was as much criticised by the _self-respecters_
as other religions. The practice of purdah,
for instance, came in for a sustained critique
and significantly enough, Islam's definitions
of female identity and freedom were debated
vigorously by several Muslims. For example,
Aa Mu Mohammed Qasim Bhakavi wrote
along article in _Puratchi_ titled 'Contraception
and the Prophet' \[_Puratchi_, December 24,
1933\]. Al-Haj Subahu Mo wrote an
impassioned piece titled: 'Why Did Women
Become Slaves? Muslim Women are also
Slaves' \[_Puratchi_, January 28, 1933\], MK
M Khader wrote on how it was absolutely
essential that women beliberated, if a socialist
republic was to be established \[_Puratchi_,
April 15, 1934\].

Such reasoned denunciations of religion
helped constitute religious ideas and practices
as legitimate objects of analysis by not merely
civil society, but also the state. In fact, the
trajectory of the _self-respecters_' critique of
religion traced a curve which lead them,
inevitably, as it were, to demand that the
state intervene in matters of religious custom,
when these proved demeaning to women. In
such instances, the state appeared to the _self-respecters_
as embodying an intelligence and
a rationality, clearly different from and
superior to the logic which informed religious
rituals and practices. The _self-respecters_'
support for the _devadasi abolition bill_ is of
particular interest in this respect.

The _self-respecters_ objected to the _devadasi_
system for several interlinked reasons. For
one, it seemed a deplorable instance of
debauchery sanctified by the priest and the
temple and rendered hoary by convention.
Besides, the fact that _devadasis_ were all
inevitably from non-brahmin castes and that
they were consecrated as temple dancers, in
service, not merely to the diety, but to the
deity's patrons, be they brahmin priests or
men of wealth, irked women (as well as men)
_self-respecters_. Then, again, the system
presented itself as a desirable vocation, so
much so that women who felt 'dedicated'
into it did not really seem to understand the
vicious logic which held them captive. For
women _self-respecters_, religion, caste and
the claims of masculine sexuality seemed to
exist in a complex and unholy articulation
in the figure of the _devadasi_. Periyar himself
held similar views and articulated them quite
forcefully \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:170--73\].

It is not to be wondered at then that women
like Ramamrithammal, a _devadasi_ who opted
out of the _devadasi_ systems and joined the
_Self-Respect Movement_, were driven to fair
degrees of self-denial and self-loathing, as
they spoke and wrote against a vocation
which was not theirs by choice.
Ramamrithammal wrote a novel, _Dasigalin
Mosavalai_ \[The _Devadasis_' Web of Deceit
1936\], which warned ingenuous, but rich,
young men of the lure and power of the _dasi_
on one hand, and which reprimanded _dasis_
for squandering their self-worth and their
very lives for the love of lucre. The novel
betrays a certain puritanical will to cleanse'
the diseased _devadasi_ of her powers of
seduction and in doing so ends up blaming
the victim, as much as the victimiser. Yet
the novel also makes it clear that within a
system which chooses certain women to
serve the lust of upper caste and wealthy
men, and which sanctifies this choice as a
god-given vocation, questions of female
desire are inherently problematic: whether
one damns the _dasi_ or whether one calls
attention to her 'autonomy', as some _dasis_
did, during this period, not wanting to
surrender their rights as '_nitya sumangalis_',
and their conventional rights to property and
ritual rights.

It was because they sensed the problematic
nature of desire, rights and freedom, as these
were understood and experienced by the
_devadasi_, that _self-respecters_ were convinced
the rights of the _devadasi_ cannot be thought
through clearly within the confines of a
system, which seemed to grant them sexual
autonomy but which restricted them to the
service of the powerful and wealthy. Thus
they wished to do away with the system
altogether and constitute these rights in a
different context. This context was to be
framed by the punitive powers of the state,
which, as Periyar made clear, ought to be
used to cleanse the body politic of social
diseases, as well as by their vision of a new
civil and social order \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:173--76\].
In other words, the law was to guarantee
and enforce rights which were to be grounded
in everyday practices, in those new structures
of feeling, the _self-respecters_ looked to create
and re-create.

For _self-respecters_, it must be pointed out
here, reason and desire did not exist as polar
elements in consciousness. Periyar wrote at
length on how love and desire cannot be
authenticated, except as aspects of well-thought-out,
reasoned choices. Otherwise,
love seemed to him capricious, mere
tomfoolery, an infatuation of the moment
\[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:180--84\]. While he
conceded that to desire is human and
therefore, a crucial aspect of existence, and
that there are no limits to freedom, autonomy
and self-fulfilment, except those we set for
ourselves, he held that in a social context,
desire had to heed to norms of reciprocity
and mutuality. Social restrictions and codes
which forbade young widows from marrying
again clearly went against the strictures of
mutuality, for these codes allowed men to
be polygamous, even as they imposed
celibacy on women \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:134--39\].
Likewise, social and religious norms
which forbade a man and woman from
dissolving their marriage, were either of
them unhappy, represented a travesty of the
ideal of reciprocity which, as Periyar argued,
ought to animate and ground conjugal food
faith \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:146\].

In matters such as those discussed above,
we find Periyar and his _self-respecters_
aligning the claims of desire to notions of
freedom on one hand and to the arguments
of reason on the other. Elsewhere, as with
his criticisms of the ideal of female chastity,
we find Periyar arguing against a sexual
ethic which sanctioned and legitimised male
promiscuity, while reproving of and
rendering illegitimate female desire. Marriage
seemed to Periyar and others to capture best
the sexual unfreedom thrust on women in
the course of history, and in order to counter
this state of existence, Periyar exhorted
women to give into the claims of a free, self-validating
desire, take on lovers, choose a
life of economic self-sufficiency and abjure
the responsibilities of motherhood
\[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:184--88\]. Here, of course,
desire assumes relevance as a counter-ideal,
an imperative in itself. Yet, in this instance
as well, it is the rational, directing intelligence,
committed to rendering transparent a gross
injustice, that propels desire. Freedom and
the love of freedom were for Periyar always
already rational choices, in that they can be
defined and understood and not merely felt
and experienced. By the same token, desire,
as an adjunct of reason requires and is authenticated
only by rational self-expression.

# WOMEN AND THE COMMUNITY OF _SELF-RESPECT_

Fighting caste and reasoning against faith,
women _self-respecters_ viewed themselves
as the citizens of the future, as harbingers
of the millennium. This millennial urge
informed the movement's perceptions of
itself to a great degree. Periyar and others
often proclaimed themselves as revolutionaries
who not only wished to stand caste
society on its head, but who were doing so,
in the knowledge that no one or no movement,
since the time of the Buddha had attempted
such a thing. For women, this millennial
imagery translated itself as an invitation to
citizenhood, to a community of comrades.
Even the _self-respect marriage_ vow echoed
the spirit of comradeship the _self-respecters_
wished to consecrate:

>Today our conjugal life that is based on love
>begins. From today I accept you, my dear
>and beloved comrade as my spouse, so that
>I may consecrate my love and co-operation
>for the cause of social progress, in such a
>manner as would not contradict your desires.[^5]

As we had remarked earlier, marriage
interpreted in the _self-respect_ fashion, ceased
to mark the limits to domesticity, family and
community and, in fact, enabled women
(and men) to orient their life to ideas, to the
world outside. As the life of Kunjitham and
Gurusamy, as of several others, indicate,
_self-respecters_ defined their lives in terms
of the world, rather than the self and family.
Working as full-time propagandists and
movement builders, who did not mind
travel, dislocations of home and career,
and yet bearing and raising children
--- with the active support of their spouses,
women _self-respecters_ lead a life, where
neither conjugality nor motherhood exerted
a dominant and determinate influence.
Periyar's --- and the movement's --- endorsement
of women's reproductive choice played
no mean role in freeing women from the bind
of motherhood, both as a set of practices and
ideology. While the freedom from actual
child rearing routines may have proved more
illusive than real, except in rare instances,
the mental and imaginative freedom which
women experienced, thinking beyond
motherhood, was experienced as very real
by women. This freedom implied that women
could talk, think and act on ideas that were
far removed from the sphere of everyday
life: they could debate politics, philosophy,
faith, in fact, any and everything. This
freedom also implied that women could look
on their bodies as their own, as part of their
being, so to speak. They could resist
reification, either into chaste wives or devoted
mothers and could think of themselves as
sportswomen, adventurers, workers and
thinkers. As a _Kudi Arasu_ editorial noted,
women needed new role models in place of
old ones: rather than self-sacrificing
_pati vratas_, they needed to be like women of
these modern times who had made a name
for themselves in science, in education, in
sports and in other feats of endurance \[_Kudi
Arasu_ 1974: January 22, 1933\].

Free to remake themselves in whatever
manner they desired and tied to men in their
lives through ties of mutuality, women
acquired a new identity: that of the citizen,
the woman of civic virtue, and one who
could claim and act on an identity which did
not subordinate her to men, nor define her
as essentially different from them. While
Periyar sometimes argued that women's
reproductive functions restricted them from
laying claim to complete autonomy in the
present scheme of things \[_Kudi Arasu_, August
12, 1928\], he also insisted that motherhood
could be rejected, in fact, ought to be
disowned by women themselves, in favour
of parenthood. As he observed:

>We maintain that while it is the case women
>possess the attribute of bearing a child in
>their wombs for 10 months and eventually
>giving birth to it, this, in itself, does not make
>them different from men with respect to
>qualities such as anger, ruling power and
>strength. Likewise, we think that though
>men do not possess the \[biological\] means
>to get pregnant, it cannot be said they possess
>qualities different from women, in respect
>of calm, love and the power of nurture. If
>we are to value true equality --- if there exists
>true love between man and woman --- it is
>certain that all responsibilities except that
>of bearing a child should be considered
>common to both.[^6]

Convinced of women's rights to all that
men had access to and claims on, and wanting
to create social institutions which would
enable women share, or even lay aside the
burden of motherhood, Girija Devi, a _self-respecter_
and fiction writer, wondered if
there should not be a special government
department which would initiate such action,
as would ensure the progress of women in
all fields. Such a department, she reasoned,
ought to be staffed only with women, who,
initially could be nominated to office, but
who would gradually by elected to their
posts by an all woman electorate. This
department was to undertake practical tasks,
of educating women, providing them with
opportunities for earning their living, and
most importantly, it was to aid and assist in
matters of pregnancy and child birth \[_Kudi
Arasu_, January 10, 1932\].

The notion of citizenship, as it was
adumbrated and defined by _self-respecters_,
for both men and women, was a complex
one: it did not merely call for a legal identity,
though this was implicit in the movement's
struggle for the civil rights of women, _adi
dravidas_ and others who were denied rights
to a _self-respecting_ existence. The _Self-Respect
Movement_ conceived of citizenship
as the founding ideal of a new republic. It
was to animate not merely claims made on
the state, but on society as well; it implied
and called forth a social commitment to the
destruction of caste, wily faith and gender
differences. Citizenship in this sense was to
define new modalities of personal and social
interaction, where _self-respect_ and mutuality
governed human relationships. It was to be
expressive of new structures of feeling which
implicated men and women in forms of
communication that allowed for a felicitous
and complex interplay between reason,
emotion, desire, freedom on one hand and
which established comradeship in love, as
in politics, as the basis of the new community,
on the other.

What was to be the relationship of
citizenship to the economy? While _self-respecters_
did deploy caste as a category of,
what we would call, political economy,
drawing attention to the manner in which
one's caste status mediated one's access to
work, education and social status, they did
not think that economic exploitation stood
to compromise a person's _self-respect_ and
rights, as much as did the oppressive power
of caste. Besides, they defined the terms of
power in caste society such that they could
point out how the division which exists in
this society, between those who carry out
intellectual labour, and those who work with
their hands, produce a surplus which is
translated, not merely into material terms,
but into symbolic and ritual terms as well.
Knowledge, claimed and possessed
exclusively by certain castes, was to them
as much a mark of exploitative social
relationships, as were relationships of
production. As far as women were concerned,
they were as condemned in this system as
the _adi dravidas_ --- into slavery and ignorance.
As S Ramanathan, a leading self-respecter,
observed:

> ... because our forefathers held women as
>property, they had to create the phenomenon
>of untouchability to safeguard this property[^7]

# CITIZENSHIP AND UTOPIA

In many ways, the _Self-Respect Movement_
bears comparison with the women's
movement. Like the _self-respecters_, feminists
address consciousness, as much as they do
structure and attempt constantly to work out
the relationship between the two, unwilling
as they are to make the transformation of
the one contingent on the transformation of
the other. Feminist struggles in the interlinked
realms of identity, community and
comradeship, likewise, demand substantive
changes in the content of human relationships,
even as they seek formal guarantees for these
changes in law. And, like the _self-respecters_,
feminists seek to root changes, whether in
structure or consciousness, in the everyday:
in modes of address, attire, use of language,
in forms of communication and in practices
of everyday living. Just as how Periyar
attempted to construct a non-brahmin historic
bloc that could claim a shared and common
identity in notions of _self-respect_ and
mutuality, so do feminists struggle to retain
gender as a valid category for the coming
together of women of different political
persuasions and ideas. In both instances, the
attempts have required an enormous amount
of energy and imagination.

Given this homological relationship
between two movements which were
concerned with re-making the human subject
of history, and given the fact that both have
allowed themselves a great degree of political
latitude in working out a politics of the
possible, it seems important that we import
lessons from the one into the other. In this
context, I wish to look briefly at the debates
which have grown around the demand, from
various feminist and anti-feminist quarters,
for a 'uniform' civil code. These debates
bear a striking resemblance to those
exchanges of 60 to 70 years ago and offer,
on that account, a discursive and political
context into which I wish to insert the legacy
of the _Self-Respect Movement_. It seems to
me that the movement possessed a notion
of rights, claims and citizenship which was
sensitive to differences, arising out of culture
and community. Yet, it chose to understand
these differences of caste and religion, in the
context of a complex social system which
deployed power and authority in ingenious
ways to string them together in an unequal
hierarchical social order. Thus it came to remake
society and re-deploy power in more
democratic and dialogic ways and in doing
so instructed a vision of gender justice which
allowed women to dream of utopia. I am
concerned here with feminist debates on the
'uniform' or, as some feminists term it, a
'gender-just' civil code, which are interesting,
embattled and even acrimonious.

Those who are hesitant in urging forth
that the state work towards the making
of such a code, point out that given the
communalisation of our polity, and the fact
that communal parties are also insisting the
state legislate such a code into existence,
feminist demands will eventually be co-opted
into a communal agenda. Besides, if
such a code were to actually be drawn up,
it may serve to strengthen the intrusive powers
of the state and render it more impervious
to democratic demands and pressures. As it
stands today, the law is not really effective
or useful in solving problems relating to
women's lives, and to demand a new piece
of legislation may help to naturalise the
fiction, that changes in the law actually help
to transform women's lives. Also, in a country
whose peoples follow a bewildering array
of customs, can one really and adequately
define the nature, content and meaning of
'gender justice'; especially since, gender as
a category exists and is in fact constructed
only in articulation with a host of other social
divisions and practices, such as those of
class, caste and ethnicity. Proponents of this
point of view argue that the more viable
thing would be to suggest and ask for reform
of personal and community laws.

Those who argue for a gender-just code
point out that such a code will not really
serve the purpose of communalists, since it
will start out on premises which are essentially
different from those which inform the
communalist argument. For instance, they
point to an existing draft (prepared by Forum
Against Oppression of Women, Mumbai)
and indicate that it not only re-defines
marriage as a contract but also interprets the
terms of conjugality completely differently.
It is also argued that feminists who speak
out in favour of a gender-just code are no
more convinced of the efficacy of the law,
as those who oppose it. But the demand for
such a legislation is at least a step towards
making the state a little more accountable
to the plight of women living under different
personal laws and suffering the
discrimination and injustice all of them
encode and practise. Besides, one may think
of such legislation in terms of particular sorts
of issues, such as to do with maintenance,
guardianship and the right to freedom from
domestic violence, rather than in terms of
the proposed legislation's effect on
community laws.

It is clear the second set of arguments are
similar to those advanced by the _self-respecters_.
They take as their starting point
female subjectivity as they imagine it ought
to exist, and speak in the name of a free,
autonomous and desiring subject, who is
already disengaged from community and
caste ties. Like the _self-respecters_, they locate
their arguments in the future, in a utopia
--- the existing draft for a gender-just code is
utopian --- and consider the present as a phase
which ought to be subjected to continual
social criticism and critical action, so that
the guarantees sought for in law may enable
transformations in civil society as well. Just
as how the _self-respecters_' demands for
interventionist legislation in the cause of the
_adi dravidas_ and women take meaning only
in the context of their attempts to find and
ground new structures of feeling in everyday
life, so do these demands for a gender-just
code make sense only in the context of an
evolving, utopian feminist project. The point
is the experiences of the _Self-Respect
Movement_ help in theorising the position of
those feminists who are critical of and do
not wish to ground identity in family and
community, and who look to a comradeship
to root a new and radical female subjectivity.
They seem to suggest that a politics of identity
need not always work from within already
existing subaltern positions. It can also
pitch its arguments in the future and in
the present which is an anticipation of that
future.

It is noteworthy that radical _anti-caste_
movements, whether in Tamil Nadu or
Maharashtra, have never shied a away from
the question of power, especially that
embodied in the state and its laws. They have
worked at ways and means of using, capturing
and deploying that power. Besides, they
represent a tradition of protest which refuses
the very idea of identity as grounded in
community, especially a community that is
pre-given and which looks to leap out of it
 --- into an imagined utopia. It is this radical
future which I would like to restore to its
rightful history, a history which, however,
must be claimed and earned, rather than
inherited.

# References

::: {#refs}

Anajmuthu, V (ed) (1974): _Periyar E Ve Ru
Sinthanaikal_ (_Thoughts of Periyar_) - Three
volumes, Sinthanaiyalar Kazhagam,
Tiruchirapalli, (translations from Tamil have
been made by the author of this paper).

\ 

Ghosh, Suniti Kumar (1989): _India and the Raj
1919--1947 (1989): Glory, Shame and
Bondage_, Vol I, Prachi, Calcutta.

\ 

 --------- . (1995): _India and the Raj 1919--1947 (1989):
Glory, Shame and Bondage_, Vol II, Research
Unit for Political Economy, Bombay.

:::


[^1]: Periyar, _Ninety-Third Birthday Souvenir_,
January 17, 1971 \[_Anaimuthu_ 1974:1974\].

[^2]: _Anaimuthu_ 1974:xxiv.

[^3]: _Kudi Arasu_, March 6, 1932.

[^4]: _Kudi Arasu_, March 6, 1932.

[^5]: _Kudi Arasu_ 1974; May 11, 1929.

[^6]: _Anaimuthu_ 1974:121.

[^7]: _Kudi Arasu_, April 12, 1931.
