_The displaced and their advocates
have been campaigning for a
law that will limit the coercive
power of the State in taking
over land. The Land Acquisition
Rehabilitation and Resettlement (LARR)
Bill 2011 adopts some of the
language and concerns from
the sites of conflict. But by
beginning with the premise that
acquisition is inevitable and that
industrialisation, urbanisation
and infrastructure will have
lexical priority, the LARR Bill 2011
may have gained few friends
among those whom involuntary
acquisition has displaced, and
those for whom rehabilitation has
been about promises that have
seldom been kept._

\ 

In its 117 years of existence, the Land
Acquisition Act 1894 (LAA 1894) has
influenced the expansion of the power
of the State to acquire and take over land.
It has helped institutionalise involuntary
acquisition. Premised on the doctrine of
eminent domain, it presumes a priority to
the requirements of the State which, by
definition, is for the general good of the
public, over the interests of landowners
and users. The doctrine of eminent
domain invests power in the state to
acquire private land for public purpose on
payment of compensation.

The language of "public purpose" has
lent a touch of public morality to involuntary
acquisition and dispossession
which, especially since the 1980s has
been facing serious challenge. Mass displacement
posed an early threat to the
legitimacy of the project of development.
This phenomenon defied the logic of eminent
domain in demonstrating that the
link between "public purpose" and acquisition
was incapable of acknowledging the
thousands, and hundreds of thousands,
who would stand to lose their livelihood,
security, support structures when land was
acquired and whole communities uprooted.
The LAA, 1894 was trained to acknowledge
a "person interested" in the land who
could, therefore, become a "claimant".
Even this limited right did not vest in the
wider multitude who would face the consequent
forcible eviction.

# Unresolved Question

An unresolved question has hung in the
air since the early years after Independence
when laws were passed to dispossess
_zamindars_: What is the relationship of the
state with land? Is it a landlord? A super
landlord? An owner? A trustee? A holder
of land? A manager? Even as this remains
in the realm of debate, the state has,
among other roles, emerged as an agency
that facilitates the transfer of land to companies
in their pursuit of projects and
profits. This has been the second, dominant,
challenge to the legitimacy of involuntary
acquisition. In 1984, when the LAA 1894
went through elaborate amendment,
the role that the State had taken on in
acquiring land for companies was reinforced.
The neo-liberal agenda, or the
reforms agenda as some term it, forged a
partnership between the state and companies.
The state casts itself in the role of a
facilitator; as the "public" in public-private
partnerships (PPP); as party to contracts
with corporations where it guarantees
certain conditions and terms that would
make projects friction free while guaranteeing
profits; as agents in procuring land
and providing clearances; as disinvestors,
through which process the transfer of
assets would occur. The alignment of state
interest with corporate interest, which has
the state acquiring and transferring land
to corporations, has had dispossessed and
displaced persons and communities seeing
the state as adversarial to their interest.

In 1984, the Statement of Objects and
Reasons (SOR) of the Amendment Act
referred to the "sacrifices" of the affected
population. "The individuals and institutions
who are unavoidably to be deprived
of their property rights in land need to be
adequately compensated for the loss
keeping in view the sacrifice they have to
make for the larger interests of the community",
the SOR read. The widening rift
in the meaning accorded to "the larger
interests of the community", and the
determination not to become "sacrifices"
in the interests of the corporatisation of
resources has become the theme song of
the past decade and a half.

A model of development that requires
extraordinary sacrifices, that is ecologically
and in socio-economic terms of questionable
repute and which is linked with
such phenomena as marginalisation,
exclusion and impoverishment has not
been able to cross the credibility barrier to
convince those who are sometimes
referred to as "victims of development".
Macroeconomic projections of growth and
prosperity have not succeeded in convincing
the project affected that their sacrifice
has value that they must respect; and this
is in evidence in the many sites of pitched
conflict and resistance where projects
venture. A challenge to the development
paradigm has in addition emerged from
concerns that the avidity with which
choice land is being handed over to corporations
to be diverted from its designated
use would compromise food security,
with agricultural land disappearing
into domains of non-agricultural uses.

# Laws and Policies

The decades since the development
project got underway in the 1950s has
caused "development-induced displacement".
Laws and policies that dealt with
rehabilitation have been around since the
1960s and 1970s. The T N Singh formula
of a job to each family displaced to make
way for public sector mines and industries
is of 1967 vintage.[^/1] Since 1976, Maharashtra
has had a law on rehabilitation
which in its current form is the Maharashtra
Project Affected Persons Rehabilitation
Act. The most discussed is the 1993
draft policy put together by the Ministry
of Rural Development.[^/2] States and public
enterprises have sporadically produced
policies. It was not till February 2004 that
a National Policy on Resettlement and
Rehabilitation 2003 was notified, to be
replaced in 2007 by the National Rehabilitation
Policy 2006. The prescriptions in
policy, the possibility of performance,
and sanctions for non-performance are
at the heart of the problem. "Retrospectivity",
which acknowledges displacement
through decades past, has been a crucial
element in the validation, or unacceptability,
of law and policy.

There has been an escalating demand to
replace the LAA, 1894 with a law that recognises
the perils of mass displacement, accounts
for those who have been dislodged
and dispossessed through the decades,
restrains companies from benefiting from
involuntary acquisition and forced eviction,
and reconsiders a model of development
that could demote agriculture
and, consequently, threaten food security.
The Land Acquisition Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Bill (77 of 2011) (LARR 2011)
introduced in the Lok Sabha on 7 September 2011
will have to be tested to see if it
meets these expectations.

# Lexical Priority

There is a problem even at the outset. A
"Foreword" to the draft bill that Union
Minister for Rural Development Jairam
Ramesh displayed on the ministry's website
on 27 July 2011 begins with these
words: "Infrastructure across the country
must expand rapidly. Industrialisation,
especially based on manufacture, has also
to accelerate. Urbanisation is inevitable.
Land is an essential requirement for all
these processes." Having set these out as
priorities which the law is to adopt, it is
then said: "In every case, land acquisition
must take place in a manner that fully protects
the interests of landowners and also
those whose livelihoods depend on the
land being acquired". This sets up a lexical
priority for industry, urbanisation and
infrastructure, and introduces pragmatism
into issues of displacement and rehabilitation.
This approach runs through the
entire LARR 2011. In the bill introduced in
the Lok Sabha, the preamble uses adjectives
such as "humane", "participatory",
"informed", "consultative", "transparent",
but the juggernaut of "development" is not
to be slowed down; the process of dealing
with its wake may be modified.

The attempt to reconcile conflicting
interests has, however, produced some
interesting elements. So:

* the idea of "legitimate and _bona fide_
public purpose for the proposed acquisition
which necessitates acquisition of the
land identified" (Clause 8(2)(a));
* that "only the minimum area of land
required for the project" can be sought to
be acquired (Clause 8(3));
* that "minimum displacement of people,
minimum disturbance to the infrastructure,
ecology and minimum adverse impact
on the individuals affected" should
be ensured (Clause 8(3)).

These capture some of the causes of discontent.
Yet, these are not justiciable
standards but indicators to be used by an
expert committee in its appraisal of the
social impact assessment which is to be
carried out as a prelude to acquisition.

The LAA 1894 was concerned exclusively
with acquisition; it was innocent of the
need for rehabilitation. In 1984, "public
purpose" was redefined to include the provision
of land for residential purposes
"... to persons displaced or affected by
reason of the implementation of any
scheme undertaken by government ..."
(Section 3(f)(v)). There was no procedure
prescribed, and no entitlements created. It
was among the purposes for which the
state had the power, under the Act, to
acquire land.

# Beyond the 1894 Act

The LARR 2011 has had to move beyond
the perimeters of the LAA 1894. Since the
mid-1990s, the demand has been for any
law of acquisition to include within it provisions
that ensure rehabilitation. That
explains the move from a "Land Acquisition
Act" to a "Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Bill". The applicability
of the law accordingly extends to
situations where land is acquired for
purposes connected with the government
and private companies including public--private
partnership projects. The notion of
the "affected family" (Clause 3(c)) has
been introduced, and this is distinct from
the "person interested" who was, and
continues in this bill to be the person entitled
to compensation. "Affected family"
includes agricultural labourers, tenants,
sharecroppers, artisans, those working
in the affected area for three years prior
to the acquisition, "whose primary
source of livelihood stands affected by the
acquisition of land" as also the person
who loses land.

It includes those whose primary source
of livelihood for three years prior to the
acquisition was "dependent on forests or
water bodies and includes gatherers of
forest produce, hunters, fisherfolk and
boatmen and (those whose) livelihood is
affected due to acquisition of land". It
includes too families to whom land has
been assigned under any government
scheme and which land is to be acquired.
In urban areas, it would include a family
residing on the land for the preceding
three years, or where their livelihood is
linked with it. This expanded idea of the
affected family could, if the law is seriously
implemented, work to prevent indiscriminate
and wanton dispossession. The
inclusion of "tribals and other traditional
forest dwellers who have lost any of their
traditional rights recognised under the
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act 2006 due to acquisition of
land" (Clause 3(c) (iii)), however, should
bring us to a screeching halt if we are otherwise
finding room for optimism.

# Diluting Forest Rights Act

The Forest Rights Act 2006 was an outcome
of concerns about the increasing
insecurity of tribals, forest dwellers, and
forest dependent communities. The threat
of eviction, or alienation, from the forest
was looming in the early years of the first
decade of this century. That tribals and forest
dwellers had no legally ascribed rights,
and this was making them vulnerable to
exclusion from their habitat. The Forest
Rights Act 2006 was not about vesting
property rights in the individual; it was
about protecting the interests of the tribals
and forest dwellers in relation to their habitat.
It was not about creating rights; it was
about recognising rights. In including the
rights created under the 2006 Act among
those that may be "acquired" through
what, at its root, is a coercive law, it reduces
the Act to merely creating transactable
property rights. The LARR 2011 does carry a
caveat: that the law relating to land transfer
in scheduled areas shall be followed. The
weakness of this protection is revealed
when we consider that the transfer of land
from a tribal to non-tribal in scheduled areas
is generally overseen by a collector, or
some agent of the state, whose job it is to
ensure that the interests of the tribal is protected.
If the state is itself to be acquiring
the land, then the protection is diminished
to that degree. If the state is legally permitted
to acquire the land to be handed over
to a private company, that dilutes the protection
further.

Bringing forest areas, and Fifth and
Sixth Schedule areas, within the law of
involuntary acquisition does not conform
to the hard-fought norms recognised in
the Samatha judgment.[^/3] The idea of
recognising rights so that they can be
monetised and taken over could be
viewed as amounting to a fraud on the
tribals and forest dwellers. If land has to
be diverted for the purposes of industry
or infrastructure in scheduled areas and
in areas in the Fifth and Sixth Schedules,
some route other than the coercive power
under the land acquisition law will have
to be found.

There are provisions that have been
introduced in the LARR 2011 which have
drawn on the debates and disputes around
displacement. Change of public purpose ---
where acquisition is based on one purpose
but it is used for another purpose --- has
been among the practices that brought coercive
acquisition into disrepute. It
revealed a casualness about state power.
The LARR 2011 reads: "No change from the
purpose or related purposes for which the
land is originally sought to be acquired
shall be allowed" (Clause 93). "Or related
purposes" does allow for some leeway, but
it still becomes a qualified power. Transacting
on land and on projects between
corporations has raised questions which,
in part, is addressed in clause 94: "No
change of ownership without specific permission
from the appropriate government
shall be allowed". Importantly: "No land
use change shall be permitted if rehabilitation
and resettlement is not complied
with in full" (Clause 42(4)). There is no
clarity on what would constitute such
compliance, and setting that out would be
necessary prerequisite to this provision
acquiring meaning.

A government, embarrassed at being
seen as an agent for corporations, has
stepped aside and is seen to be encouraging
corporations to buy land from
landowners, with the State stepping in
when a substantial portion --- LARR 2011
sets it at 80% --- has been bought. The
rehabilitation aspect of LARR 2011 would
apply where the State steps in, and also
where a project exceeds 100 acres in rural
areas and 50 acres in urban areas, whether
or not the state has had a role in the
purchase of land.

# Few Rights

For years now, "market value" as a basis
for compensation has been sought to be
replaced by "replacement value". LARR 2011
falls far short of considering that
standard, even as it provides the calculus
that will increase the total amount
received as compensation. The possibility
of other forms of compensation, such
as shares in the enterprise for which the
land is being acquired, is built into this
bill. But land for land, jobs in the enterprise,
annuities, fishing rights are alternatives
only as the rehabilitation authority
deems practical. There are few rights
and entitlements in this construction
of the law.

The retention of the "urgency" clause
is inexplicable. It is true that there is a
significant contraction in the LARR 2011
of the reasons that can provoke the use of
the urgency power. Unlike the LAA 1894
which vests vast discretion in what is
considered urgent, and which has resulted
in indiscriminate use of this power,[^/4]
the LARR Bill 2011 restricts it "to the
minimum area required for the defence
of India or national security or for any
emergencies arising out of natural calamities".
These situations may require
immediate possession, but the permanent
severance of the relationship between
the land and persons interested in
the land is excessive. "Requisitioning"
land or property,[^/5] and taking it free of all
encumbrances, are two distinct processes.
This power does not belong in a land
acquisition law.

Clause 59 of the 27 July draft allowed
for imposing a penalty for obstructing
acquisition of land with imprisonment
that could extend to one month or a fine of
₹500 or both. This provision, which was
a carry-over from LAA 1894 (Section 46)
fortunately finds no place in LARR 2011. In
another context, the 27 July draft had provided
for the "return of unutilised land"
and this seems to have quietly slipped out
of the LARR 2011. This is a significant
omission, which has been replaced by the
idea of a "Land Bank" (Clause 95). The
perception of the state as a rightful holder
of land is in evidence not only in this notion
of the land bank. Clause 2(1) (a) recognises
an interest in the government to
acquire land "for its own use, hold and
control" --- each of these terms recognise
an extraordinary interest, and power, in
relation to land which conflicts around
this power have sought to tame. The LARR
2011, in reinforcing this broad sweep of
power and interest, keeps the conflicts
alive. Fuelling the conflicts further is the
expansion of this law to give priority to
"use of private companies for public purpose
(including public--private partnership
projects) ...", and acquisition "on the request
of private companies for immediate
and declared use by such companies of
land for public purposes" (Clause 2(1) (b)
and (c)). The prioritising of infrastructure
projects, which is then defined to include
"educational, sports, healthcare" and even
"tourism" are unlikely to lull the fears of
those who anticipate large-scale transfer
of land to follow if this bill were to
become law. More bluntly stated, these
are likely to draw the lines of conflict
more sharply still.

There is an interesting departure from
the LAA 1894 in Chapter XII which attempts
to set out "offences and penalties".
Producing a false document, making a
false claim for rehabilitation are made
punishable. In a departure from common
practice, the LARR 2011 suggests that "disciplinary
proceedings" may be drawn up
against a government servant who "if
proved guilty of a _mala fide_ action in
respect of any provision of this Act, shall
be liable to punishment". This, and other
provisions in this chapter, though, are
non-specific and, so, not likely to be
enforceable as they now read. Clause 79,
for instance, provides a punishment "if
any person contravenes any of the provisions
relating to payment of compensation
or rehabilitation and resettlement". It is
not clear if this refers to officials, affected
families or any others; or whether it will
cover such acts as "overacquisition". Considering
the serious consequences of
involuntary acquisition and forced eviction,
"offences" are a component that can
usefully have a place in this law; but it
clearly needs inputs assisted by imagination
and experience. A special mention of
the diversion of land from multi-cropping
to other uses employs the language of
"exceptional circumstances" and "demonstrable
last resort" when such diversion is
to occur, and percentages prescribed for
the maximum extent that may be allowed
(Clause 10).

# Land Titling Bill

There is another bill which must be seen
in conjunction with the LARR 2011. The
Land Titling Bill 2011 which has been
released by the Ministry of Rural Development
in draft form, connected law. That
bill is an attempt at commoditisation of
land, making it tradable in the land market.
The long title says that the law is to
create a "conclusive property titling system".
It is to "prepare a record of all
immovable properties". It shifts the onus
from the state to the individual to keep the
records updated on pain of punishment,
and even loss of acknowledgement of title
to the land or interest in the land (Chapter
VI, "Compulsory Intimations to Land
Titling Authority"). Clause 36(3) cautions:
"All persons are deemed to have notice of
every entry in the Register of Titles".
Indicating that the purpose of the bill is
simplifying transactions on land, it says:
"Any title recorded in the Register of
Titles in accordance with the provisions
of the Act, shall be considered as evidence
of the marketable title of the
landholder" (Clause 41).

Indemnification in transactions on land
is an idea that is undertaken by insurance
companies as part of their business activity:
they indemnify land titles and bear
the cost of litigation and ancillary matters
if they were to arise. The idea of introducing
an "indemnification" clause, where
the government indemnifies a person who
acts on the basis of the title as it is recorded
in the Land Registry (Clause 42), is a case
of the government taking over the role of
an insurance company. They indemnify
land titles and bear the cost of litigation
and ancillary matters if they were to arise.

The draft Land Titling Bill is not about
updating land records. It is not about the
accuracy of land records, but about
its finality for purposes of determining
encum brances and saleability. It is about
deciding on a means by which land may
be easily dealt with in the market.

The displaced, project affected and dispossessed
and their advocates have been
campaigning long and hard for a law that
will limit the coercive power of the state in
taking over land. The LARR 2011 adopts
some of the language and concerns from
the sites of conflict. But, in beginning with
the premise that land acquisition is inevitable
and that industrialisation, urbanisation
and infrastructure will have lexical
priority, the LARR 2011 may have gained
few friends among those whom involuntary
acquisition has displaced, and those
for whom rehabilitation has been about
promises that have seldom been kept.


[^/1]: _Ibid_. _See also_, _Butu Prasad Kumbhar vs SAIL_ ,1995
Supp 2, Supreme Court Cases, 225.


[^/2]: Walter Fernandes and Vijay Paranjpye (1997), _Rehabilitation
Policy and Law in India: A Right to
Livelihood_, Indian Social Institute.


[^/3]: _Samatha vs State of Andhra Pradesh_ (1997) 8,
_Supreme Court Cases_, 191.


[^/4]: _See_ for e.g., Ashish Tripathi, "HC Quashes Acquisition
of 600 Hectares of Land in Greater Noida", _Times of India_,
dated 19 July 2011.


[^/5]: _See_, for instance, Requisitioning and Acquisition
of Immovable Property Act 1952.
