There may be a case for holding that the study of parliaments is
acquiring a new significance. May it not be one of the more important
ways towards a sorting out of the collection of 'new states'? For it
would seem that some of our western devices of discrimination serve poorly,
and yet we are properly uneasy to see 'new states' itself used as anything
more than an introductory category.

The character of the political system of any modern state is substantially
dictated by the manner in which political forces are organised in a party
system. The character of the party system of most 'new states' is not easily
described in the terms which have until recently been common in the West.
There are some new states in which there are two main parties, others in
which there are several and many in which there is one. But the West-derived
labels of one-party, two-party and multi-party state seem very inadequate
to describe these systems. In order to escape from the western
typology it may be useful to employ new terms, but this is not easy. However,
we can use the by now familiar term 'one-dominant-party system' as
starting point. It has the three advantages that it has not been much used
in the analysis of western systems, that it is broad enough to seem to cover
quite a number of 'new state' situations (even including cases from each of
the more usual one, two and multi-party headings) and that it does perhaps
bring out some of the features which several new states share and which do
somewhat distinguish them from older states.

This is not the place to put the term 'one-dominant party' through its
paces./1 Here the point must be simply that however much more useful it is
than 'new states' as an invitation to structural analysis, it still has the defects
of its virtues and one of these is that it is an umbrella under which too many
can shelter. The dominance in fact varies as we know --- in cause, in form and
in degree --- and the range over which these systems spread is very great. So
we search for tests and criteria which will give us sub-categories, hoping that
these will be not less meaningful than the main category. Obviously one set
of tests will concern the internal organisation of the party that counts and
the roles that it plays, comparing, for instance, India's Congress with
Mexico's P.R.I., with T.A.N.U., with Nasser's Arab Socialist Union. But,
equally clearly, another set of tests can be related to the nature and rôles of
parliament. It goes without saying that these two sets of tests are very closely
connected; one kind of dominance may require a particular kind of parliament.
What I hope to show here is that there can be a one-dominant-party
régime which so far from rendering parliament feeble actually makes for its
strength and vigour.

/1: This is attempted in a chapter of the author's Government and Politics of India to
be published in Autumn 1964 by Hutchinson.


The parliament-rôle criterion can perhaps be expressed in general terms:
how far can one speak of parliament as constituting a distinct framework
which mediates between government and the political forces of the country
as a whole? This question could be put in ways that would at once associate
it with the familiar concepts of constitutional and responsible government.
How far does parliament make an independent contribution to the existence
of a political system in which the constituent elements (the government in
particular) operate according to rules which they are not able unilaterally to
prescribe? How far does parliament serve to make effective "the right (as
Bentham put it) the subject has of having the reasons publicly assigned and
canvassed of every act of power that is exercised over him"? But, that said,
it is better to proceed to more specific questions.

# II

It may be convenient to combine an introduction to the bare bones of
parliament in India with some reference to the Constituent Assembly debates
on the relevant parts of the Constitution. Indeed, a point to be made at the
outset is that India did rather deliberately choose its political institutions.
This must be understood in the sense that at least public discussion of the
Constitution took place on 165 days and that attempt was often made to
create a blank slate' atmosphere. "I have no doubt," said the Chairman in his
address on the first day, "that you will ... pay greater attention to the provisions
of the American Constitution than to those of any other"! It must
not be taken to imply that there was great argument on the largest issues,
nor that serious argument of any kind took place outside quite a small circle.
The residue Muslim Leaguers did advance the case for a Swiss fixed-term
collegiate executive chosen by the legislature on a P.R. basis --- having the
evils of communal majority rule in mind but putting the argument as one
of governmental stability. They picked up a few bits of support from
radicals and eccentrics but were no more successful in shaking confidence
in the parliamentary system than were the few agonised pleas for a constitution
of Gandhian or indigenous character. (These latter were so vague and
negative as to provide no clear picture of alternatives. Only in recent years
has a J.P. Narayan sketched what a Gandhian constitution might look like.)
These views were firmly dismissed; the decisive argument was put in the
claim that India's "constitutional traditions have become parliamentary"
and that there was nothing in her own experience that would justify the
discarding of established ways of political behaviour.

Although India has only one Parliament it has seventeen parliamentary
bodies, sixteen of which (this includes Nagaland which is still in process
of establishment) are state legislatures. The latter are constitutionally
modelled very closely on the Union Parliament. Operationally, there is much
imitation but practice can vary more widely. The Union Parliament consists
of the President and two Houses, Lok Sabha (House of the People) and
Rajya Sabha (Council of States). State Legislatures consist of the Governor
and either (in nine States) two Houses, Legislative Council and Legislative
Assembly, or one House, Legislative Assembly.

It is tempting to dismiss the upper house very briefly and this temptation
is not worth resisting. The matter was little debated at the time of constitution
making and even less discussed subsequently. It cannot be said that the
ideas behind the creation of a second chamber were perfectly clear. The
choice of the title Council of States in place of the pre-independence Council
of State, taken together with certain specific powers given to the Council
(_e.g._, to permit Parliament to legislate on matters on the State list of subjects,
to approve an extension of the range of all-India civil services), suggest a
'federal' rôle. But in fact this was not stressed by the framers, it was not
safeguarded by the composition and manner of election (all but twelve
members chosen on P.R. basis by state legislative assemblies and each state
having a fixed quota related mainly to population but modified to give
smaller states a little more and larger states less), and it has certainly not
appeared in practice. The Rajya Sabha is not less party-minded than the
Lok Sabha --- indeed the contrary, for independents and small parties squeeze
in less easily than by direct election and the party blocs in the assemblies are
more party-oriented than any electorate. For the same reasons the 'revision'
function, about which rather more was said in the constitutional debates, has
not been particularly in evidence. The government has sometimes had
second thoughts about bills which have passed the Lok Sabha and has used
the Rajya Sabha to correct itself, but this is a different matter and one more
related to a 'delay' function. Timetable convenience apart (ordinary bills may
be introduced in either house, and amendments proposed by the other,
money bills can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha which can unilaterally
reject any recommendations from the Rajya Sabha), the most important
function performed by the Rajya Sabha at present is that perspicaciously
discerned by one member in the constitutional debates and advanced by him
as the main argument for a second chamber: "It is common knowledge that
in this country there is so much enthusiasm, and if for no other reason we
must find opportunity for various people to take part in politics". This is not
an unimportant consideration. The question is whether this need could not
be met in other ways. It may be noted that ministers (who have the right
and thus the duty to speak in the house of which they are not members)
have been known to express despair at the difficulty of making repeat
speeches on the same measure in the two houses and that the suggestion
has been made --- so far without effect --- not that the Rajya Sabha should be
abolished but that joint sittings should become common routine.

The Constituent Assembly laid down the maximum size of the Lok Sabha
and also the population limits of constituencies. The population increase
soon made nonsense of this double provision; the restriction that went was
that on constituency population. The size was in fact also increased from 500
to 520 but is regarded as pegged at that point. The average constituency
population is now over three-quarters of a million. Some commentators find
this appalling, but the prevailing view is that a larger house is an even more
unpleasant prospect. Suffrage extends to all adults but candidates must be
twenty-five years old. There are no other positive qualifications and the list
of disqualifications is not unusual --- except perhaps for the exclusion of
those dismissed from government service for corruption or disloyalty, those
absent from sittings for a period of sixty days without permission and those
"with any interest in government contracts, execution of government or
service" --- and how this last is interpreted is not clear. ("Offices of profit
under government" caused the usual difficulties but ordinary legislation has
clarified the position.) Literacy tests were discussed but rejected, as were
also the institutions of referendum and recall. The rejection of literacy tests
helped to secure the case against P.R. which had some support --- though
the framers were evidently opposed to it on considerations of stability of
governments.

The Constitution provides the outlines of legislative procedure as regards
the three parts of Parliament and also sets out the fundamental rules concerning
financial questions including for instance the list of items expenditure
on which is charged on the Consolidated Fund of India and thus not to be
submitted to vote of Parliament. It was further decided to include in the
Constitution provisions relating to the 'Officers of Parliament which include
not only the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha (the Vice-President of India _ex
officio_), the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and their Deputies, but also the
'separate secretarial staff' about which there had been struggles in the
twenties. (The Constitution does not unambiguously place the Secretariat
under the Speaker and although there has been no trouble in securing this
in Delhi, the same unfortunately cannot be said of all States.) Of all the
other constitutional provisions relating to Parliament, probably none is
more interesting than that governing privilege. The framers spelt out freedom
of speech and immunity from court proceedings in respect of parliamentary
speech or publication, but decided the rest should be defined by Parliament
and that "until so defined ... \[should\] be those of the House of Commons of
the Parliament of the United Kingdom". This upset many at the time who
gathered that there was a certain vagueness about privilege in the U.K.and felt
that the reference showed insufficient signs of independence. Subsequently,
the debate has been on occasion revived and there are those who favour
Parliament's attempting to define its privileges. So far, the Speakers and
Secretariat have held out against this, arguing that definition means curtailment
and entails an invitation to the courts to determine privilege by an
examination of the law and by inspecting its relation with the fundamental
rights provisions of the Constitution. Most of the cases to date have concerned
press comment alleged to be contempt of the house; although individual
members have indeed been over-sensitive it must be acknowledged
that Indian Press language can be vitriolic; in any case, the committees of
privilege have generally taken a calm view and have been content with the
extraction of apologies./2

# III

Perhaps the first question to ask in order to ascertain whether a parliament
is performing a 'mediating framework' rôle is: how fair are the elections?
Here there are many points to inspect. The territorial constituencies agreed
upon by the Constituent Assembly as the basis for elections are left by the
Constitution to be regulated by ordinary laws of parliament. But the dangers
perhaps latent in this provision have been avoided by the provision which
parliament in fact made for a Delimitation Commission presided over by a
retired Supreme Court Judge. Complaints about gerrymandering have not
been absent but have been no more common than in England --- and this in
spite of areas of great delicacy. Secondly, the electoral system of mainly
single-member constituencies with a simple first-past-the-post method of
determining the winning candidate was (as already mentioned) chosen after
some discussion of alternative methods. Certainly proportional representation
would have favoured all opposition parties, though not so much as they
sometimes pretend; P.R. would not have put Congress generally out of
power, it would have complicated its task. Third, the conduct of all elections
is placed by a separate chapter of the Constitution in the hands of an Election
Commission consisting of the Chief Election Commissioner and Deputy Commissioners.
The former is an independent official appointed by the President
not for life but under conditions otherwise similar to those of judges, with
salary not subject to vote and removal only by a two-thirds vote in both
Houses. His staff for the preparation of rolls and for the actual conduct of the
balloting consists of ordinary state government officers. Complaints of partiality
on the part of election administrators have been rare and their substantiation
rarer.

/2: However, an important crisis arose in the state of Uttar Pradesh recently. The
Assembly sentenced a journalist to imprisonment for contempt and infringement
of the privileges of the House. The individual petitioned the U.P. High Court challenging
the legality of the sentence as an infringement of fundamental rights. A bench of
the High Court ordered his release pending disposal of his petition. The Assembly then
directed the advocate and judges to present themselves before the Assembly and to explain
why their action in turn should not be regarded as in contempt of the Assembly.
The advocate and judges petitioned the full High Court which passed interim orders to
restrain the Speaker and other respondents from implementing the direction. At this
stage the President of the Republic referred the difficult constitutional questions involved
to the Supreme Court.

Inspection of the legal and administrative framework does not exhaust
the question of fairness. It would be absurd to pretend that in India the
government party enjoys no special advantages. Ministers may all too
easily use their position and facilities and fail during the campaign to draw
the lines between government and party. This may often make a mockery
of the laws regarding election expenses. The legal limits (Rs. 25,000 for a
Lok Sabha constituency) are low and the routes around the provisions are
several and well-trodden. Moreover, the government party has easier access
to large business donations than other parties. Above all, the government
party has so much more, legitimately and illegitimately, to offer; and
promises to one can so easily become or come to be felt as threats to another.
But much of this can reasonably be regarded as the kind of imperfection,
aggravated admittedly, familiar to older democracies; an inegalitarian society
does place barriers before fairness. It is serious enough but it is still different
in kind from the contrived kind of unfairness which handcuffs the opposition
press, inhibits the free activity of opposition politicians and strikes terror
into voters. Outside Kashmir (and perhaps at times Punjab) these things do
not happen in India.

If parliament is to be real it must be fairly conducted as well as fairly
elected. Here, if more than self-restraint on the part of the governing party
is to be looked for, the position of the Speaker and the group of parliamentary
officials is central. The Indian parliament's first decade was guided by the
able Mr. Mavalankar, sharp and shrewd, patient and determined, faithful
Congressman but no tool of the government. He built up his own parliament
staff and with them largely shaped the rules and conventions of debate,
established the privileges of the House and protected them both from enlargement
at the expense of the public and from encroachment for the advantage
of government, set up a machinery for determining with adequate opposition
participation the allocation of parliamentary time and created a whole
system of parliamentary committees to function as watch-dogs over the conduct
of administration. That is, he made his position --- and through it that of
parliament --- one of substantial independence of government. It cannot be
said that the Speakers of most State Assemblies have been so successful and
it cannot be said of all that they even tried very hard. Yet even here the influence
of the centre has been felt and by means of the annual Speakers'
Conference the spirits of the weaker ones have been rallied. Quite recently,
the Speaker of the Punjab Assembly, under pressure from the State government
to depart from the line of impartiality made a stand of resistance and
in doing so announced that he would seek support from his fellows at the
next Conference./3

The fair conduct of proceedings is a good test of parliamentary independence
but with a weak opposition more may be required if government
policy and its administration are to obtain certain and searching examination.
Here the structure and working of parliamentary committees is particularly
important. The Public Accounts Committee (P.A.C.) is the senior of
them in that the first P.A.C.s were constituted at the centre and in the
provinces as early as 1923. But they met under the chairmanship of the
Finance Member, their secretariat consisted of finance department officials
and their rôle was firmly confined to technicalities. Moreover, the AuditorGeneral's
position was more governmental than independent and he was
in no sense a servant of the legislatures. When in 1950 the P.A.C. was made
a real parliamentary committee (since 1954, it contains members of the
Upper House also) and the Auditor-General's independence spelt out in the
Constitution, an effective examiner of the administration was created.
Expertise has been acquired and enthusiasm has developed among both the
members and the parliament secretariat staff who service the committee.
The fact that Congress has, of course, a majority on the P.A.C. is less
important than that all members become devoted to the job they have to do.
The fact that their scrutiny is ex post facto is less important than that the
government has continuously to act in the knowledge that scrutiny of any
item may take place and that waste or impropriety may be widely exposed
in the House and the press. The fact that government replies to the P.A.C.
are often vague and cool is less important than that behind the reply there
has often been embarrassment and some resolve not to let it happen again.

The Estimates Committee, created in 1950, has made up in activity for
its later arrival. Indeed, it has gone far to justify the parliamentary joy and
the official hostility which attended its establishment. Its thirty (Lok Sabha)
members are charged with the examination of departmental estimates. They
cannot get far by a perusal of the bare estimates and there is no equivalent
of the audit report on which the P.A.C. bases its work. are therefore
mpowered to call upon the ministries to furnish material in support of their.
estimates. Like the P.A.C. they then proceed to the examination of witnesses
from the departments under review. In the dozen years a good deal has been
learnt about the best ways of questioning officials. They are supposed to look
for possible economies but they have in fact been happy to rub out the faint
line between economy and efficiency. Further, they have not hesitated to
recommend in the name of efficiency large administrative reforms and even
re-orientations of policy. Their audacity occasioned strong comment and it
may be that they have in the last few years been more modest in the scope
of their reports. But of their growing competence and effectiveness as a control
over ministries there can be no doubt. If they find less to be indignant
about it is in part because their influence is now automatically reckoned
with.

/3: It must be recorded, however, that he has subsequently resigned. At the time of the
election of his successor, a Member of the Assembly remarked bitterly that since no
one could stay as Speaker if he incurred the displeasure of the Chief Minister, the party
Leader might as well hold both offices.


Similar stories could be told of other committees of the Lok Sabha ---
including the extraordinary Committee on Government Assurances which
records and chases the most casual ministerial promise to 'enquire into the
matter' and the Committee on Subordinate Legislation which scrutinises the
use made by departments of rule-making powers delegated by Parliament.
The use of select committees is a stage in the legislative process which has
been rather limited to bills of great complexity whose detailed examination
would have been difficult in general debate; some such bills have been quite
considerably amended in committee. A last kind of committee which must
be mentioned is the Consultative Committee. Of these there are now several
covering each area of government and corresponding mainly to ministries.
They are in a sense a revival of the standing advisory committees of imperial
days. Those committees had been effectively dominated by British Members
of the Executive Council who used them mainly to sound Indian non-official
opinion, but this is not to say that their advice was not taken nor that they
were otherwise without value. They were in any event done away with in
1952 following the general election --- under pressure from ministers, perhaps
out of fear that the newly elected opposition members could not respect confidences,
ostensibly because the committees blurred and confused ministerial
responsibility. Congress backbenchers did not protest loudly for they knew
that the party's own committees on transport, agriculture, etc. would achieve
the same purpose. To alleviate opposition disappointment, the P.M. said he
would hold informal conferences on different subjects with the opposition.
Out of this promise (as well as the desire to meet opposition frustration and
perhaps the need in foreign affairs and economic development to associate all
with the government) came the Consultative Committees. It is not easy to
assess their value but at least some of the advantages hitherto open only to
the Congress M.P. (opportunity to cultivate special interests and enjoy an
additional channel for making representations and communicating ideas)
must have been made available to the opposition.

To these points must be added others of an even less tangible and measurable
kind. Question Hour in India has perhaps gained a certain reputation,
not undeserved, ever since (then) Sir Anthony Eden was said to have felt
more at home during his witnessing of it than he had while attending that
of the Australian Parliament. While the form of the initial question is firmly
disciplined, the freedom given to the putting of supplementaries is fairly
large and Ministers cannot use escape routes on too many occasions. (In any
case, this only gives the Committee on Government Assurances further
opportunities for the chase). Decisions may or may not be affected, but
reasons must be given for what is being done.

The same is true of general debates. No doubt the opposition must lose
when it comes to the button-pressing and no doubt whips are hardly ever
disobeyed. But the opposition is heard by the public and it also addresses
itself continuously to the appropriate sections of the Congress Party itself.
Further, the currents in the Congress are sensitively judged by the whips and
communicated upwards. Concessions may or may not be made there and
then, but the point can be taken for next time. Moreover, there have been
great occasions when Parliament has 'spoken for India' and surprised the
Government. Perhaps the reaction to the Voice of America' deal is a good
recent example.

# IV

The outcome of all this is that opposition groups are able to be far more
effective in Parliament than their proportion of seats might suggest. (They
would no doubt have been even more effective if they had not been so
diverse in nature and if they had more talent available.) It also adds up to a
view of Parliament --- and even the State Assemblies to a much lesser degree
--- as possessing distinct character and performing a distinct rôle, an independent
institution not to be seen as an extension of government or of party.

Now there is certainly a sceptical, even a denigrating view of parliament in
India --- a view found as much in India as outside. This view often seems to
owe little to examination of the evidence, a great deal to romantic pseudocomparisons
and much to bits of _a priori_ reasoning which argue that it is
difficult to believe that one new state can have succeeded where others have
failed and that there is a necessary incompatibility between one-dominantparty
régimes and genuine parliamentary institutions. But clearly, the pointing
of the evidence to success will be more readily acknowledged if reasons
can be given for this state of affairs.

A great deal can be attributed to "legacies' of one kind or another. The
pre-1947 experience 'counts'. The legislatures under British rule were not full
parliaments but they were not captive and docile durbars. The government
could act without the legislature if it could not act with it; it could not be
stopped from doing what it liked. But it could not do what it liked with
and through the legislature. Within their constitutional limits, the quasiparliaments
preserved their dignity and their independence. Government
was massively present in the legislature but the two could never be confused
or identified. The legislature was, if anything, its elected element, and that
element was largely the permanent opposition to British rule.

A related but different point is that Indian politics has been brought up
in a school of distrust. In so far as the distrust is of almost everyone, it is a
mark of a deeply divided society. But alien rule added its contribution to
this by giving some people, indeed politically leading people, the mission of
cultivating distrust in established political authority. This has laid a curse on
some aspects of political life, but it has helped to provide a soil for opposition
even in the absence (for other reasons) of much of an Opposition. A particular
consequence of this is that India has been able to create a 'separation of
powers' atmosphere without any 'separation of powers'. Parliament is far
from being the U.S. Congress but very often it speaks of 'government in the
tones that good American legislators speak of 'the administration' and the
Secretariat is made to seem as far from Parliament House as the White House
is from Capitol Hill.

Thirdly, account must be taken of the profundity of ideological commitment
of many of India's rulers to the Westminster model. It is here, as at
other points, that the passing of Nehru is by some feared as likely to mark
the end of a period. It is true that of Nehru, headmaster though he was,
it makes sense to say that if opposition had not existed he would have
found it necessary to invent it. Nehru's acceptance of the need for institutions
of accountability and machinery for the expression of grievance and
criticism was genuine --- even though it was accompanied by a personal disposition
towards impatience and anger when challenged or impeded. But
he could not have imposed a system on an unwilling movement. Vital though
it was, if parliament was to be a real body in its own right, that he should
give it his own personal support, it seems unlikely that his colleagues at any
time held different convictions. Such general dedication to the idea of
parliament was determined in part by the need to prove an old point, to
disprove old allegations that India could never become a home for responsible
government. But by now attachment to the institution has grown.
Parliament might not have been able to flourish as it has done without
nourishment from the example and preaching of Nehru, but it does not
follow that it must now wither with his going. For one thing, it is no longer
so difficult to accept and praise what came from the imperialist home; for
another, it has become easy in fact to forget where it did come from;
and origins come to matter less than present worth. There is by now some
attachment to the familiar, and habit sets the seal. Whether or not "time
and custom give authority to all forms of government", they have been at
work on behalf of parliament in India, and sixteen years is not always
--- least of all in a new state --- a short time. At the same time it has to be
acknowledged --- and with gratitude especially to the one man whose influence
was paramount --- that before habit could do its job, it was necessary
that in the minds of a few at the top there should have been some vision of
what was proper and some capacity to impose that vision on others.

This capacity to impose brings one to the last but perhaps most vital
factor of all: the Congress Party. Without that dominant party there could
hardly have been a successful imposition. At least in that sense then, the
one-dominant-party system has served not to destroy but to sustain parliamentary
institutions. But there are of course specific characteristics of this
organisation which saved the reality of parliament. The three main points
must be put briefly here even though they require much further elaboration.
The retentive capacity of Congress --- no automatic result of nationalist
struggle but rather the work of great skill acquired over a long period
--- has meant the holding together of very many regional and sectional interests
within the one organisation. This has not merely ensured governmental
stability but also averted the total exclusion of any part of the
national community from the channels of power. The Sikhs and the Tamils,
the industrial workers and the Harijans have been able to find as much place
inside Congress as anywhere else. In this way coherently disaffected segments
have not materialised and fear of threats to the integrity of the state
has been mostly allayed. D.M.K. has been substantially contained and the
C.P.I. has been unable (except in a few areas) to win secure segment bases.
The fearlessness which parliament needs has been mainly preserved.

Second, the same retentiveness has made a monolithic party very difficult.
This has given every opposition group some _point d'appui_ (and even point
of entry) in the Congress itself, so that its work is not as much in vain as
might appear. (The fact that Congress has never at the centre or in the
States as a whole had a majority of the country's votes behind it has also
given the opposition a boldness and the government a certain caution
which could not be understood from the distribution of seats alone.) It has
also made a reality of the inescapable federalism of Indian politics. Above
all perhaps, the history of Congress has practically demanded a continuous
tension --- at every point except that under the immediate control of Nehru
--- between government and party or between the party's ministerial and
organisational 'wings'. (The 1963 Kamaraj Plan --- and, even more, the choice
of Kamaraj as Congress President --- seems to invite the tension to move into
Delhi in future. The removal of Nehru seems likely in the long run to accentuate
this trend even though relations between Kamaraj and Shastri be good
and the latter's appointment as Prime Minister due in some measure to
support from Kamaraj.) This has given state politics a seemingly shabby air
at times but has also provided a built-in opposition in the form of the party
officials.

There is a third sense in which the one-dominant-party has saved parliament.
Although Congress was more widely based as a nationalist movement
than many, adult franchise nevertheless opened up new worlds to conquer.
These new worlds of village politics were in their essential nature alien to the
modern political system, worlds of traditional social cleavages and ascriptive
political leadership. But Congress, partly by virtue of its hold in the middle
layers of the intermediaries, partly because of its power as government party,
partly by its willingness to be 'corrupted' by the values and pressure of rural
society, has been able to absorb and integrate these realms. _Panchayat_ Raj is
now assisting the process. The little loyalties of the little community' find
room in the party; caste is accommodated. A system of political communication
opens up, linking top to bottom. In other words, the men from the
alien worlds are not excluded from the system but brought in --- and with this,
the potential threat to parliament from social change seems to be passing
over.

One way of summing up the effect of these factors of legacies, skills and
structure is to say that they make for an 'open' party system. The system is
'open' both within the dominant party as well as between it and the others.
Governments do not alternate, no pendulum swings, it is not 'competitive'
politics in the Western-derived and absurdly exacting sense in which the
phrase is used as a criterion by sad critics of the new states. But this is surely
less important than that here is a particular kind of one-dominant-party
regime which is perfectly compatible with strong parliamentary institutions.
