_Even as the poor are kept teetering on the precipice of
demolition and destruction of habitat, the assumption of powers
by the state that can be exercised selectively and arbitrarily,
based on a legality that it manufactures, has continued to flourish
in contradiction of the inclusive interpretations developed in
human rights jurisprudence. The right to housing has been
rendered invisible, even non-existent, in this exertion of power,
and the evolving meaning of 'housing' and 'adequate housing',
and the injunction in the matter of forced evictions has been
thrown into a cauldron of callous neglect._

\ 

Slums, in common parlance, are
settlements where the urban poor
live. Epithets such as 'squatters' and
'encroachers', and attributes such as
'illegality' and 'ineligibility' characterise
perceptions about the lives and habitations
of slum dwellers. While casting the
slum dwellers into a stereotype, dirt, criminality,
pilferage and their abetment of slumlords
to prise public lands for unconscionable
gain, are most routinely caricatured.
These are the descriptions imposed on
slum dwellers by those who do not live
in their midst.

An alternative adjectival construction
of the slum dwellers would represent them
as service providers who keep urban
inhabitants in home, health and happiness;
persons and communities aspiring to fuller
citizenship by seeking to utilise the economic,
educational and social opportunities
that exist in the cities. Slum dwellers
can be described as migrant workers who
build up cities for those who can afford
to buy what they build; who add to the
glory of the state every time an Asian
Games or a Commonwealth Games happens;
or in the development of a metro or
reclamation: industrial hands, whose
labour is recognised, but not their need for
residence when a city is planned, or the
plan is implemented. To at least 30 per
cent of almost any city's population, 'slum'
is simply 'home'.

In law, a 'slum' is something else. A
'slum area' is "any area (where) buildings
in that area: (a) are in any respect unfit
for human habitation; or (b) are by reason
of dilapidation, overcrowding, faulty
arrangement and design of such buildings,
narrowness or faulty arrangement of streets,
lack of ventilation, light or sanitation
facilities, or any combination of these
factors, detrimental to safety, health or
morals", once it is so notified in the official
gazette. The mere existence of these
characteristics will not do; it has to be
notified to be a slum area.

In determining whether a building is
unfit for human habitation, it will be tested
to find out if it is wanting in terms of:
(i) repair; (ii) stability; (iii) freedom from
damp; (iv) natural light and air; (v) water
supply; (vi) drainage and sanitary conveniences;
(vii) facilities for storage, preparation
and cooking of food and for the
disposal of waste water.

This is how the Slum Areas (Improvement
and Clearance) Act, 1956 defines a
slum area. This is a central law that applies
only to certain union territories, but the
states too have laws that are near identical,
or imperfect, clones.

It is instructive to revisit why this law
was made. In the 'long title' to the 1956
Act, parliament said it was "An Act to
provide for the improvement and clearance
of the slum areas ... and for the protection
of tenants in such areas." In 1990, the Law
Commission of India in its _138th Report_
which recommended "legislative protection
for slum and pavement dwellers"
explained the logic of the 1956 Act and its
various versions that states had enacted:

>The existing slum clearance legislations
enacted by different states by and large
focus on protection of tenants of privately
owned uninhabitable _chawls_, owners
whereof are not interested even in maintaining
the same in habitable conditions,
inasmuch as these are liable to collapse
and result in loss of life and/or are rendered
unfit for human habitation on
account of falling in disrepair and in order
to remedy prevailing insanitary conditions
giving rise to diseases and epidemics(p. 26).

So it transpired that most laws made
to deal with slums provided for the re-induction
of the tenant after repair,
refurbishment or reconstruction of the dilapidated
or dangerous structure. In any
event, it was almost always required that
a "prescribed authority" must be approached
to give permission to evict the
tenant from a slum, and in addition, as in
the Gujarat law:

>S 17 (4) "In granting or refusing to grant
>(permission for eviction of tenants), the
>prescribed authority shall take into account
>the following factors, namely:
>
>(a) whether alternative accommodation
>within the means of the tenant would be
>available to him if he were evicted; ..."

None of this applies when the tag of
'illegality' or 'encroachment' is attached
to a set of habitations. A slum in law, it
may be reiterated, is, therefore, not a slum
as understood by users of non-legal language.
It is the control that municipal
corporations have over 'public' lands, and
the central government has over 'public
premises'[^/1] that acts as an aid to facilitating
demolition and eviction.

There is, in fact, no law that acknowledges
the habitations of the urban poor,
and included in this neglect are slums as
non-lawyers know them, and pavement
dwellings. It is this realisation that led to
the Law Commission's _138th Report_ being
a series of metaphorical exclamations. This
report is a period piece, located between
_Olga Tellis_ (1985), where the Supreme
Court recognised the link between livelihood
and habitation while yet not willing
to go all the way in asserting the rights
of slum and pavement dwellers, and
_Almitra Patel_ (2000), where the Supreme
Court infamously likened the resettlement
of a slum dweller to rewarding a pickpocket.

In 1990, the Law Commission took it
upon itself to "(e)xamine the problem
pertaining to the plight of slum and
pavement dwellers facing eviction at the
hands of the local authorities."[^/2] "The
magnitude of the problem", the chairperson
wrote to the minister of law and justice.
"can be gauged from the fact that nearly
3.5 crore of citizens of India live in slums
and on pavements of metropolitan cities ...
\[Q\]uite often their huts are razed to the
ground and they are evicted by the local
authorities without offering them any alternative
facility. The plight of these unfortunate
evictees comprising women
and children is indescribable. Some legislative
protection needs to be provided to
them to ensure that they are not evicted
without offering them an alternative
facility unless it is virtually impossible to
do so."[^/3]

Wending its way through a profile of
slums and slum dwellers, municipal laws,
the Constitution, court decisions and the
extant body of legislation pertaining to
slums, the report wound down to the
conclusion that:

>Presently there exists no legislation affording
any protection to the slum and pavement
dwellers in the event of their being
evicted from these slums or pavements by
the local authorities, apart from the fact
that there is no social security scheme
designed to rehabilitate them on their
eviction.

It also said:[^/4]

>There is, therefore, a pressing need, in the
light of constitutional values, humane
considerations and as a matter of social
justice, for inserting into our legal system
a requirement by way of a central legislation
to the effect that before slum dwellers
are evicted by local authorities, it shall be
the duty of the concerned local authority
to provide alternative site, accommodation
or facility to such evictees, and providing
that pavement dwellers are not disturbed
unless it is inevitable to do so in the context
of some emergent situation.

It clarified:[^/5]

>Such alternative accommodation, site or
facility offered for rehabilitation shall be
within as short a distance as may be reasonably
practicable, ... of the place from
where the slum dwellers are sought to be
evicted.

This is a clear position that the Law
Commission took against the exclusion of
slum dwellers from city spaces.

The 1990 report of the Law Commission
appears to have been given a quiet burial
amidst the dusty shelves of the government,
for no such law emerged. Instead,
in 1993, Justice B N Kirpal, who authored
the _Almitra Patel_ decision seemed to have
started a trend to reverse the _Olga Tellis_
empathies when he, along with a brother
judge, said in _Lawyers' Cooperative Group
Housing Society vs Union of India_:[^/6] "It
appears that the public exchequer has to
be burdened with crores of rupees for
providing alternative accommodation to
_jhuggi_ dwellers who are trespassers on
public land."

In 2000, in _Almitra Patel_, this use of
"large areas of public land" for what was
considered "private use free of cost"
resurfaced. This raises the question of the
status of public land, and the uses for
which it may legitimately be deployed.
There is too the striking fact that while
eviction from unauthorised occupation
routinely involves elaborate processes in
law and in the courts, eviction of the poor
from public lands seems to have the barest
in the matter of procedure, and peremptory
demolition has been able to establish itself
as a practice.

Is the state the owner of 'public' land?
Or does it hold the land in trust to be used
for constitutionally appropriate purposes?
The priorities that have emerged over time
are testimony to de-prioritising of the needs
of the urban poor. _Olga Tellis_ holds a
position of pre-eminence in housing law.
This was a time, in the early 1980s, when
the Supreme Court was emerging as a
champion of those rendered weak and
vulnerable, and the poor was among the
court's constituency.

The petition arose out of an announcement
made on July 13, 1981 by the chief
minister of Maharashtra of which state
Bombay (now Mumbai) is the capital, that
all pavement dwellers in the city of Bombay
were to be evicted forcibly and deported
to their respective places of origin or
removed to sites outside the city of Bombay.
There was a direction to the Commissioner
of Police to provide the "necessary assistance"
to the Bombay Municipal Council
(BMC) to demolish the pavement dwellings
and deport the pavement dwellers.[^/7]
The chief minister's apparent justification
for this course of demolition and deportation
was: "It is a very inhuman existence.
These structures are flimsy and open to the
elements. During the monsoon there is no
way these people can live comfortably."[^/8]

The demolitions began, and it is recorded
that the BMC put families into transport
that would take them out of Bombay
towards their places of origin, The demolitions
were stayed by an order of the
Bombay High Court. It was contended:

>that the pavement and slum dwellers resided
>where they did to be near their places
>of work. If they were forcibly evicted, they
>would lose their livelihood along with being
>de-housed, and this would result in a denial
>of the right to life, the right to life and the
>right to work being interdependent.
>
>that the pavement and slum dwellers,
>numbering about 47.7 lakhs constituted
>about 50% of the total population
>of Greater Bombay, that they were the
>major workforce for Bombay, that they had
>lived in the hutments for generations, that
>they had made a significant contribution
>to the economic life of the city, and it
>would be unfair and unreasonable to destroy
>their houses and deport them.
>
>that the non-implementation of the Master
>Plans of cities had resulted in concentration
>of business and commercial areas to
>which the homeless naturally flocked, and
>the neglect of action under the Urban Land
>(Ceiling and Regulation) Act 1976,[^/9] as
>also of rural programmes of employment,
>health, education, transport and communication,
>could not be made to visit the
>city's poor.

that the pavement and slum dwellers could
not be treated as "trespassers" since they
were where they were only on account of
"economic hardship."

The court's response was eclectic. In one
breath, it held: "... we have to consider
... whether the right to life includes the
right to livelihood. We see only one answer
to that question, namely, that it does ...
If the right to livelihood is not treated as
a part of the constitutional right to life, the
easiest way of depriving a person of his
right to life would be to deprive him of
his means of livelihood to the point of
abrogation." Yet, it is only a person who
is deprived of his right to livelihood "except
according to procedure established by
law" who can challenge the deprivation as
offending the right to life conferred by
Article 21. The BMC should, then, give
notice to the pavement and slum dwellers,
and give them a hearing before demolishing
their dwellings. So it was that, even
as the right to livelihood was recognised
as an integral part of the right to life itself,
it was quickly shrunk to a minimum procedure
of notice and hearing.

The echoes of this position resonate in
later decisions, only by then even the
procedure is reduced to a grudging formality.
So, in 1996, a bench of the Supreme
Court warned the state to mount a "constant
vigil" against encroachments for:

>the longer the delay, the greater will be the
danger of permitting the encroachers claiming
a semblance of right to obstruct removal
of the encroachment. If the encroachment
is of recent origin the need to follow the
procedure of principle of natural justice
could be obviated ... On the other hand,
if the corporation allows settlement of
encroachers for a long time ... necessarily
a modicum of reasonable notice for removal,
say two weeks or 10 days, and
personal service on the encroachers or
substituted service by fixing notice on the
property is necessary. If the encroachment
is not removed within the specified time,
the competent authority would be at liberty
to have it removed. That would meet the
fairness of procedure and principle of giving
opportunity to remove the encroachment
voluntarily by the encroachers.[^/10]

The _Olga Tellis_ court represented the
issue as a contest between pedestrians and
pavement dwellers, which the latter definitively
lost. Competing claims have been
the themes of other litigation too. In
_Bombay Environmental Action Group
(BEAG) vs A R Bharati_,[^/11] it was the Sanjay
Gandhi National Park which was seen as
threatened by encroaching slum dwellers.
In _Almitra Patel vs Union of India_,[^/12] the
court developed the contours of a contest
between garbage management in Delhi
and slums. The slum dweller, of course,
was the unvarying loser. The spate of demolitions
that have been visited on the slum
dweller in Mumbai recently take strength
from the legal terrain lost to the slum
dwellers, and ignore the cry of constitutionality
and inclusiveness that emanated
from the Law Commission in 1990.

The _Almitra Patel_ decision is especially
significant for its understanding of public
interest, and of the obligation to pay for
land. The petition in _Almitra Patel_ was not
about slums and slum dwellings at all. It
was about garbage disposal in the metropolises.
Slums were brought in as the court's
agenda, by portraying slums as the reason
for the generation of "garbage and solid
waste"! This time round, clearing up of
slums was not so subtly equated with the
agenda of cleaning up the city. Even as the
court castigated the process of resettlement
as amounting to rewarding a pickpocket,
for the slum dweller would be getting an
alternative site in place of public land they
had been using 'free of cost', the court had
to deal with another ticklish issue of free
land versus paid for land in relation to
garbage disposal and landfills.

The Municipal Corporation of Delhi
(MCD) is responsible for garbage disposal,
and the court had directed the MCD to
identify and prepare "a sufficient number
of landfills". But the sites were not available,
because the land owning agencies in
Delhi, including the Delhi Development
Authority and the government of the
national capital territory of Delhi, were
demanding market value for the land, which
would cost more than Rs 40 lakh per acre
of land. The court had to intervene to ask
the other agencies of the state to hand over
land to the MCD free of cost. For, "keeping
Delhi clean", the court said, "is a governmental
function ... It is the duty of all
concerned to see that landfill sites are
provided in the interest of public health.
Providing landfill sites is not a commercial
venture, which is being undertaken by
MCD ... Not providing the same because
MCD is unable to pay an exorbitant amount
is understandable. Landfill site has to
be provided and it is wholly immaterial
which governmental agency or local
authority has to pay the price for it."[^/13] So,
"The sites so identified shall be handed
over to MCD and/or NDMC within two
weeks of the identification, free from all
encumbrances and without MCD or NDMC
having to make any payment in respect
thereof."[^/14]

This is how it came to pass that, in one
decision of the Supreme Court, the two
constituencies of the court --- garbage and
the slum dweller --- found themselves being
so differently treated. The legality of the
poor finding a residence within the city has
thus, and therefore, become dependent on
their paying capacity. (This of course does
not acknowledge the many costs that the
poor do pay, especially since illegalised
existences are inevitably expensive.) And
given the cost of land in cities, most
denizens would need the state to use its
persuasive and coercive powers to make
land affordable. The group housing societies
in Delhi, for instance, stand testimony
to this state intervention, where the state
agency bought the land in land acquisition
proceedings and redistributed it to clusters
of people who could form themselves into
a group and summon the resources to
construct multistoreyed apartments.

India has a Constitution that has an
inclusive agenda. That is, every person in
the territory of India counts, with citizens
having an edge over others. But, when the
capacity to purchase becomes the determining
factor of who will, and who will
not, have the right to urban spaces, there
is an incapacity that gets built into the lives
of the country's impoverished and the poor.
The existence of the poor then is kept in
a constant state of illegality, with 'rightlessness'
being foisted upon them. There
is an admission in the 10th Plan Document
that runs like this:[^/15]

>Urban housing shortage at the beginning
of the Tenth Plan has been assessed to be
8.89 million units. As much as 90 per cent
of the shortfall pertains to the urban poor,
and is attributable (among other reasons)
to ... \[non\] provision of housing to slum
dwellers. In urban areas, the problem
becomes complex due to two factors: the
high cost of land, and the lack of
access to institutional credit for workers in
the informal sector, including the self-employed.
Provision of affordable housing
requires allocation of government
owned lands, and cross-subsidisation
from commercial properties and colonies
developed for the affluent, to those for the
urban poor.

Despite this setting out of the dysfunctional
state in the matter of providing
housing, demolitions have become the
order of the day. What does this bulldozing
of homes mean in the face of a statistic
that says that 90 per cent of the housing
responsibilities of the state that remain
unmet relate to the poor? Plainly, this
represents the destruction of housing stock
that the poor have created, with no assistance
from the state, and despite the inhospitable
conditions in many of the areas
where they are allowed to set down roots,
however temporary the tenure. And this
destruction is despite the Planning
Commission's apprehension that "\[d\]uring
the Tenth and Eleventh Plan housing
shortage would go up further due to population
growth, in addition to the backlog
of housing shortage in the Ninth Plan."[^/16]
That the state becomes functional only to
destroy the homes of the poor makes a
mockery of the much-touted goal of
'Shelter for All' by 2012.[^/17]

Demolitions are an assertion of state
power. This power is found in the folds
of laws which cast the slum dwellers in
a twilight zone of illegality in which they
may be tacitly permitted to reside till the
law, and power are exerted to forcibly evict
them. This understanding of state power,
however, pretends to an ignorance of state
obligation. In the years since the establishment
of the United Nations, human rights
jurisprudence has been assiduously developed,
precisely anticipating the imbalances
of power and access. The obligation of the
state to 'protect, promote and fulfill' the
rights of peoples has become the theme
song in the UN's recital. And states, including
India, in acknowledgement of the
disinterested morality of this jurisprudence,
have signed and become parties to documents
that spell out rights and obligations.
The International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) is
one such. It is part of a significant body
of international law that has made strides
in recognising, and naming, rights, and
which does not allow the force of legality
to cloud over the legitimacy of human
rights. The right to 'adequate housing' is
such a right.[^/18]

The committee established under the
covenant has adopted a practice of issuing
general comments which contextualise the
rights that are merely stated in the ICESCR
and explains their import. Drawing on a
wide range of experiences from around the
globe,[^/19] General Comment 4 interprets the
right to housing as not merely being concerned
with having a roof over one's head
or a commodity, and adds that, "it should
be seen as the right to live somewhere in
security, peace and dignity".[^/20] "Adequacy"
would necessarily include legal security of
tenure, availability of services, materials,
facilities and infrastructure, affordability,
habitability, accessibility,[^/21] location[^/22] and
cultural adequacy. "The concept of human
dignity and the principle of non-discrimination"
are integral to this right.[^/23] In
reporting to the committee, a state is to
provide detailed information about the
groups within ... society that are vulnerable
and disadvantaged with regard to
housing, and "include, in particular,
homeless persons and families, those
inadequately housed and without ready
access to basic amenities, those living in
'illegal' settlements, those subject to forced
evictions and low-income groups".[^/24] And
General Comment 4 acknowledges that
"the full enjoyment of other rights --- such
as the right to freedom of expression,
the right to freedom of association ... the
right to freedom of residence and the
right to participate in public decision-making
--- is indispensable if the right to
adequate housing is to be realised and
maintained by all groups in society".

In 1997, the committee addressed the
issue of "forced evictions" in its General
Comment 7, where it refined the notion
of legality by imposing a prohibition on
forced evictions except where it is "in
accordance with the _law and in conformity
with the provisions of the International
Covenants on Human Rights_".[^/25] This is
to be read in conjunction, in particular,
with Article 2.1 of the ICESCR which
obliges states to use "all appropriate means'
to promote the right to adequate housing".[^/26]
Quite simply:[^/27]

>Evictions should not result in individuals
being rendered homeless or vulnerable to
the violation of other human rights. Where
those affected are unable to provide for
themselves, the State party must take all
appropriate measures, to the maximum of
its available resources, to ensure that
adequate alternative housing, resettlement
or access to productive land, as the case
may be, is available.

Reflecting an understanding of what is
increasingly in evidence, the committee
has reiterated the importance of states
reporting on:

>measures taken during, _inter alia_, urban
renewal programmes, redevelopment
projects, site upgrading, preparation for
international events (Olympics and
other sporting competitions, exhibitions,
conferences, etc.), 'beautiful city'
campaigns, etc., which guarantee protection
from eviction or guarantee rehousing
based on mutual consent, by any
persons living on or near to affected sites.[^/28]

These General Comments are significant
especially in the distinction they make
between legality as enacted by the state,
and legitimacy as developed in international
human rights law. It is the pragmatism of
the state which edges out an understanding
that the poor are not illegal out of choice.
On the contrary, were they to opt for legality,
they would almost invariably find themselves
prised out of the possibility by the
interplay of penury and power. Even as the
poor are kept teetering on the precipice of
demolition and destruction of habitat, the
assumption of powers by the state that can
be exercised selectively, and arbitrarily,
based on a legality that it manufactures has
continued to flourish, in contradiction of
the inclusive interpretations developed in
human rights jurisprudence. The right to
housing has been rendered invisible, even
non-existent, in this exertion of power, and
the evolving meaning of 'housing' and
'adequate housing'; and the injunction in
the matter of forced evictions has been
thrown into a cauldron of callous neglect.
It is to this human rights and constitutional
vacuum that the urban poor are now being
externed. A resurrection of the obligations
of the state, and construing the potential
for legality of the urban poor as the state
has constructed it,[^/29] have acquired an
urgency with the spate of demolitions that
are rendering whole sections of our populace
homeless and insecure.

In speaking about the urban poor, it is
imperative that we draw a distinction
between 'poverty' and 'impoverishment'.
"\[P\]eople are not naturally poor but are
made poor", as Upendra Baxi, inspired by
Marx, explains:

>and impoverishment is a dynamic process
>of public decision-making in which it is
>considered just, right and fair that some
>people may become, or stay, impoverished.
> 
>These decisions are made by people who
>hold public power, ... (and it is) the non-poor
>(who) influence and make decisions
>the result of which is, cumulatively, to
>make or keep large numbers of 'others'
>impoverished.[^/30]

The condition in which the urban poor
find themselves in this rendition, is itself
a result of impoverishment. But even if this
were to be laid aside as being a hypothesis
after the fact, that demolition impoverishes
is an incontrovertible fact. The urban
poor, who use their enterprise, labour,
genius and every opportunity to better their
lot, construct their lives through a process
that is engraved with uncertainty, and the
pitfalls provided by illegality. Yet, they
work, study, find creative avenues of
fulfilment in the hovels which is all they
are allowed to build. The distance between
the slums and the apartments and bungalows
around them is too wide to bridge,
and aspirations often extend only to moving
incrementally, with hope and faith pinned
on a future generation, Demolition destroys
these aspirations, and the possibilities that
the urban poor have created for themselves.

When demolitions happen in February,
and the children who have worked their
way through years of school find themselves
on the streets on the eve of their
public exams, as happened in the Yamuna
Pushta demolitions in 2004, it is a destruction
of possibilities. When those 'eligible'
for resettlement are cast on to lots which
are miles away from where they were, and
the schools near the resettlement site are
not prepared to receive them, this too is
a dashing of legitimate dreams. When a
housemaid is exiled to a site 30 kms away
from the houses where she has earned trust
and stability, this is immiseration. When
the daily wager is relegated to a minuscule
plot of land that is located 25 kms from
the area where recruitment of waged
workers happens everyday at 4:30 in the
morning, this is the creation of unemployment.
When families are declared to be
'ineligible' for relocation --- maybe because
they do not have the documents to prove
they have been resident in the vicinity for
long years; maybe because they lack the
resources to pay the 'seed' money of
Rs 7,500; maybe because they were away
at work when the tokens were distributed;
maybe because the ration card had expired,
and the new card shows too recent a date
to make them eligible; maybe because
the man is dead and a woman cannot
prove herself as being eligible except in
extraordinary circumstances --- the move
to another abandoned spot, uninhabitable
and therefore unthreatening to the non-poor
when the poor occupy it, is impoverishment.
Then there are, of course, the
tangible losses that remain in the ruins that
the bulldozer leaves behind.

Impoverishment of a citizen cannot be
the agenda of any state. There is a logic
as to why the poor live in slums, and the
state's inaction in the construction of shelter
is a part of that logic. The possessions of
the poor, their homes, their things, their
hopes, their dreams, are treated with no
regard when demolition takes over as state
policy. The perception that the poor are
illegal anyway, so have no rights, has
fostered a negation of the right of the slum
dweller to be recognised, and considered,
as a human person. Slum demolitions have
acquired a synonymous status with clearing
spaces, cleaning up cities, beautification,
and the rising culture of malls and
parking lots. When slum dwellings are
destroyed, slum dwellers are expected to
vaporise, to vanish, especially the 'ineligible'
--- while the eligibles are given a
choice between exile to miles away, or
urban nomadism. But slum dwellers are
people and, as people, they are made of
flesh and blood, and hopes and desires,
and they cannot disappear.

It is this truth of the ineffective state, the
distorted priorities and the human being
that the slum dweller is, which will have
to be confronted, Exclusion and exile of
the urban poor will have to be outlawed,
and 'demolition', which speaks to destruction,
assault, damage to property and to the
dignity of the person, will have to be taken:
out of the lexicon of the state. The legal
system, as it exists, casually hands over
power to agencies of the state, and this
power is being used to prevent the poor
from fending off impoverishment. But
impoverishment is a constitutional offence,
and, recognised as such, institutions that
hold and wield power must be re-trained
to understand the difference between legality
and constitutional legitimacy, and
learn to respect the right to life, livelihood
and shelter.


[^/1]: See, for, eg, Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971.

[^/2]: _138th Report_, letter of the chairperson to the
minister for law and justice.

[^/3]: _Ibid_.

[^/4]: _Ibid_., at p. 26, para 9.3.

[^/5]: _Ibid_., at p. 26, para 9.5.

[^/6]: Civil Writ No 267 and CM 464 of 1993 in
the Delhi High Court quoted in the _Draft
Annual Plan 2000--01_ of the MCD,
J J Department, p. 8.

[^/7]: Though, at first glance, the case seems to be
concerned only with pavement dwellers, it in
fact develops into a judgment on pavement
and slum dwellers.

[^/8]: Cited at p. 557.

[^/9]: This Act was intended to impose a ceiling on
urban holdings. "With the growth of population
and increasing urbanisation, a need for
orderly development of urban areas has also
been felt. It is, therefore, considered necessary
to take measures for exercising social control
over the scarce resource of urban land with
a view to ensuring its equitable distribution
amongst the various sections and also avoiding
speculative transactions relating to land in
urban agglomerations." (Statement of Objects
and Reasons, _AIR Manual_, Volume 44, 5th
edn, 1989:1999, p. 780). This Act was repealed
in 1999 because it had become "this most
potent clog to housing", and "provided
copious opportunities" (Statement of Objects
and Reasons attached to the 1998 Bill). So,
the Act as passed in 1999 allowed those who
had managed to hold on to possession of the
land. contrary to the law, to retain it
(section 3(2)). The Act has to be adopted by
each state to come into effect in that state, in
conformity with the constitutional norms of
federalism.

[^/10]: Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation vs Nawab
Khan Gulab Khan (1997) 11 SCC 121 at 130,
emphasis added. The Madras High Court
expressly followed this dictum in _T Ramasamy
Poojari vs Tahsildar_ (2000), 3 Madras Law
Journal 845, asserting the power of precedent.
In the meantime, the _Olga Tellis_ bench had
reiterated its position in _K Chandru vs State
of Tamil Nadu_ (1985) 3 SCC 536, pertaining
to Madras city.

[^/11]: Writ Petition No 305 of 1995 in the Bombay
high court.

[^/12]: \(2000) 1 SCALE 568.

[^/13]: _Almitra Patel_ vs Union of India (2002) 2 SCC 679 at 686.

[^/14]: _Ibid_., at p. 688.
p

[^/15]: Tenth Plan Document, para 1.80.

[^/16]: _Ibid_. at para 1.81.

[^/17]: _Ibid_.

[^/18]: See Article 11(1) of the ICESC.

[^/19]: Since 1979, the Committee records in General
Comment 4 adopted in 1991, "the committee
and its predecessors have examined 75 reports
dealing with the right to adequate housing."
This is apart from other sources cited in para 2
of General Comment 4.

[^/20]: _Ibid_. para 7.

[^/21]: 'Within many states parties increasing access
to land by landless or impoverished segments
of the society should constitute a central policy
goal' (para 8(e)).

[^/22]: 'Adequate housing must be in a location which
allows access to employment options, health
care services, schools ... This is true both in
large cities and in rural areas where the temporal
and financial costs of getting to and from the
place of work can place excessive demands
upon the budgets of poor households' (para
8(f))

[^/23]: _Ibid_., para 9.

[^/24]: _Ibid_., para 13.

[^/25]: General Comment 7, para 3, emphasis added.

[^/26]: _Ibid_., para 8.

[^/27]: _Ibid_., para 16.

[^/28]: _Ibid_., para 20.

[^/29]: See further, Usha Ramanathan, '_Illegality and
Exclusion-Law in the Lives of Slum Dwellers_',
International Environment Law Research
Centre (IELRC), [http://www.ielrc.org/content/w0402.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20070501000000/http://www.ielrc.org/content/w0402.pdf).

[^/30]: Upendra Baxi, 'Introduction' in Upendra Baxi,
_Essays on Law and Poverty_, p vi, 1988.
