Independence (1947) marked a sharp break with the past in the sense
that the colonial power got replaced by peoples' elected representatives
and subject people became citizens having dreams, demands and
aspirations. During the struggle for independence those guided by the
desire to forge the strongest anti-imperialist front were the nationalists.
Within the movement they underplayed their differences in the interest
of unity. However, once the goal of independence was achieved, the
urgency for unity against imperialist forces and consensus was soon
replaced by competition. Those who had earlier foregone their
differences for larger interests and goals, began to carve distinct and
independent entities for themselves. This process became more clearly
defined with the extension of franchise and electoral competition after
the Constitution of India came into force in 1950. Independence thus
marked the change from nationalist politics to competitive power
politics.

The phase towards the making of the constitution was instrumental
in evolving new relationships among those participating in competitive
politics and carving out new identities. In this context the interaction
between Nehru and the Indian communists was significant as the
debates that followed though ideologically sound were politically
fragile. The role of the communists was enigmatic and remained so
towards the competitive politics that emerged after the constitution
came into force in 1950.

This paper therefore examines how Nehru legitimized the twin
goals of national unity and parliamentary democracy through the
constitutional framework to put India on the way to modernization and
laid the nationalist road to socialism. In the process to persuade people
to accept his objectives he drew scathing criticism of the communists
that turned to be the pretext to their relationship with Nehru in the post
1947 era. The paper is split into two parts. The first deals with the
communist criticism of the composition, character and working of the
Assembly and defines the whole exercise a result of the compromise
and collaboration with the British imperialists. The second part
examines the communist deliberations on the proposed provisions of
the constitution. The inner contradictions are deeply embedded in their
analysis and get exposed as they reject the constitution yet decide to
participate in competitive politics that followed.

# I

It is important to recall that with the change in the line of the
communists during the second world war (1941) by deciding to follow
the soviet line and support the British, and not the Quit India movement
launched by Congress, they chartered a course that was bound to bring
them into conflict with the Congress, the national movement and its
leaders. This was evident more with the parting of the ways in 1942
and got reconfirmed with their ouster from the Congress, in 1945. It is
equally important to recall that "Nehru's corpus of texts and political
action provide an endless chain of interpretations and reinterpretations.
Several styles or types of discourse seek to reincarnate a figure known
as Jawaharlal Nehru and each seeks to appropriate Nehru for distinct
ideological ends. One may wish to recall Nehru as he was in pristine
purity. But as he himself was so fond of saying, life moves on in
ceaseless change; in the flux of history, which is also unceasing
interpretation, no identities with fixed, eternal essences may be
located."[^/1]

The cooperation and confrontation between Nehru and the Indian
communists was thus guided as much by their ideological preferences
as by tactical considerations. Nehru, with all his leanings towards
socialism, was above all a nationalist. Saddled with the added
responsibilities, it was natural for him to give primacy to the unity and
integrity of India and propose a strong centre to protect India against
foreign attacks. He drew upon parliamentary democracy and advocated
universal adult suffrage, free and fair elections, independent judiciary
and press, civil liberties and constitutional guarantees to govern such a
vast country. The communists on the other hand were guided more by
their ideological preferences to appropriate Soviet or Chinese model
of communism. The mutual reactions help to review the conflict through
an interface of the two broader ideologies of nationalism and
communism. To examine how communists began to ground themselves
in Indian politics in post-1947 one can see it in their reaction in the
immediate context of the constitution making and their attitude towards
Nehru.

It is important to point out that Nehru was visualizing independent
India when the communists guided by the Comintern were following
an ultra-leftist strategy and vehemently criticised the nationalists as
bourgeoisie. Since early 1930's Nehru was consistently proposing a
Constituent Assembly elected on the basis of the adult suffrage to draw
up a constitution for India. He believed this to be the only democratic
way to give effect to the wishes of the people, bring economic issues
to the forefront and solve the communal problem. He expected to it to
be a real representative body of the masses with power to decide and
give effect to its decisions. He advocated full representation of masses
because that would not bring the economic issues to the forefront but
help recede communal issues into the background by rendering them
unimportant. He expected this to help solve the Indian problems in
terms of economic reality.[^/2]

It is pertinent to say that the communists were significant by their
absence in this Constituent Assembly for the constitution making.[^/3]
Somnath Lahiri represented the communist view so long he remained
its member till July 1947. There was no other communist representative
in the Assembly.[^/4] They reacted not from within the Assembly but from
outside and were considerably active and verbal in expressing their
views, a practice that turned to be their _modus operandi_ later in Indian
politics. The Communist Party was the only political group outside the
Assembly which decried the constitution.

The initial differences of the communists with Nehru from the
beginning of the Assembly made it difficult for them to cooperate with
him in the making of the constitution. Their distinctive approach and
attitude further widened the existing differences that had surfaced during
the war period. Differences among communists in their attitude towards
Nehru were more evident since 1943 as some distinguished Nehru from
the congress. The paper is thus an account in order of sequence to
explore their reactions in the process to frame the constitution.

Nehru's decision to accept the Cabinet Mission's plan for the
Assembly and to participate in its deliberations did not tantamount to
acceptance of the plan as a whole. It only implied their acceptance to
enter the Assembly to give it a fair trial. Nehru was firm to abandon
the Assembly if it could not serve their purpose. He emphasised on the
need to examine and reach decisions with the perspective of achieving
their ultimate objective of complete independence. His priorities were
evident when he pleaded to examine everything in the context of Indian
independence. The proposed Assembly, according to Nehru, was
constituted to frame the constitution for a free and independent India
based on democracy and complete sovereignty of the people of a
republican State according to their standards and in the light of their
own interpretation.

The communists on the other hand opposed the Cabinet Mission's
plan to utilize the newly elected (1946) Provincial Legislative
Assemblies as the Electoral College for the future Constituent Assembly
because they viewed the proposal with a different perception of their
broad understanding of India as the home of distinct nationalities.[^/5] They
demanded a constitution making body on the principle of universal
adult suffrage and sovereign constituent assemblies for each 'national
area' and demanded that the delegates to the constitution making body
be elected by these sovereign constituent assemblies.[^/6] They strongly
objected to the participation of the princes and hence, opposed the
Constituent Assembly's decision (December 1946) to appoint a
committee to confer with the Negotiating committee that was set up
by the Chamber of Princes. They opposed the official resolution because
they did not want the 'princes or their stooges' to participate in the
Assembly.[^/7]

The communists disapproved the Congress' acceptance of the plan
for the Constituent Assembly because they regarded the Assembly a
creation of the British meant to lead India into a new partnership with
the British imperialism. Hence, they expected no freedom of action
within the Assembly because it drew its powers from the British. They
abhorred Congress decision as a big compromise with the imperialists
and characterized the Assembly as unfettered but not free.[^/8] Nor did
they accept it as a sovereign body since the plan did not recognize the
Indian Independence. With such perception of the Assembly, with so
many limitations, communists anticipated a slave constitution based
on Hindu--Muslim disunity and princely autocracy.[^/9] They refuted the
Congress' claim that the Assembly represented all interests and
maintained that it represented the Congress, _zamindars_, industrialists,
traditional liberals and communal Hindus.[^/10] The communists also
characterized the Assembly as undemocratic because the members were
elected on the basis of indirect elections, by provincial assembles, which
represented only 13% of the people.[^/11]

When the Assembly was constituted (1946) Nehru realized that it
was not elected on universal adult franchise but he did not reject it
simply because it was not in accordance with certain principles, rules
or notions he had advocated in the past. He anticipated both its positive
and negative aspects that could turn it either to be a useless body or a
powerful instrument for achievement of freedom. Instead of rejecting it
at the outset he agreed to test it on the touchstone or the existing facts
and desired objectives. He decided to rely more on the way they handled
the Assembly and made its working a success.

Nehru expected the Assembly to function as a free body because
he was least threatened by any possible interference of the British
Government. Although the Assembly was a British creation yet he was
confident that the British would have nothing to do with it once the
Assembly began its work. He repeatedly ruled out any solution that
was drawn up by the British and was unwillingly imposed. He was
confident that the acceptance of a certain procedure in advance could
neither prevent nor limit their absolute freedom to determine their own
course in the Assembly. He firmly believed that Indian constitution
could be determined by her own people without outside interference.[^/12]

Nehru had no qualms about the proportionate strength of the people
in the Assembly and he regarded the Assembly a sovereign body since
it had no foreign in it and no outside authority could interfere with its
decisions. He was least perturbed that no weightage was accorded to
certain communities whom the British imperialists had pleased for their
own benefit. He was against separate representation for each group
and community and stressed on the need to curb such tendencies instead
of encouraging them.[^/13] He rather envisaged a constitution that was able
to cement the loose fabric of India and connect diverse religious,
linguistic ethnic and racial groups. In this regard Nehru's stand was
contrary to that of the communists who saw India as the home of distinct
nationalities. The communists proposed representation of all national
units on linguistic and cultural bases.[^/14]

It was surprising that in spite of the strong criticism leveled against
the origin, composition and aims of the Constituent Assembly the
communist decision to contest the elections to the Assembly. Not only
this, they even regretted that the Congress High Command was not
able to spare even one seat for them while it had included 'old liberals,
chauvinists, Mahasabhaites, big landlords and arch profiteers in their
list'.

In defense of their decision to contests, Communists argued that it
was a part of their strategy to carry on the battle inside and outside the
Assembly to expose British designs. They viewed that the boycott of
the constitution making body would have meant playing the British
game. Because they perceived the Assembly as a manoeuvre to smash
the growing upsurge, split the freedom movement and perpetuate
imperialist rule in a new form, they decided to use the Assembly as a
forum to expose the imperialist designs.[^/15]

They severely condemned the role of the Congress leaders who
constituted the bulk of the Assembly representatives and dubbed them
as the allies of the British imperialism, the representatives of the
capitalists and the vested interests. In the Congress dominance they
saw the dominance of the bourgeois upper class whom they labeled as
'past masters in the art of demagogy, in the art of cheating people'.[^/16]
They complained that the Congress representatives had made lavish
promises to the Indian people before they came to power. After coming
into power they put a loud pretence of adherence to democratic
principles but repudiated every one of them in practice. The Communist
attempt to distinguish Nehru from his other colleagues in the Congress
and the Assembly was explicit when they argued that though Nehru
led liberal elements of various shades in the assembly it was inevitable
that the ultimate result would be a compromise between right and left
groups of the Congress. What was implicit and what perhaps
communists failed to realiže were the inner contradictions within their
own party.

With this broad perception of the Assembly it is not difficult to
understand why the communists defined it as 'the ill begotten conceived
out of sight and behind the back of toiling masses born as a result of
the betrayal by the bourgeois Congress leadership, enacted in 1946
when they crossed over and entered into alliance with imperialists.'[^/17]

The communists exposed the weaknesses of the Assembly on the
basis of the differences among the members of the Assembly. Little
did they realize that they themselves could not be absolved of the same
charge explicit in their attempt to distinguish Nehru from his other
colleagues. It is not out of place to argue that Nehru, too, was not
unmindful of the differences among the members but stressed on the
need to carry on the proceedings to preserve national stability. But
since Nehru and the communists failed to reconcile on the broad
framework of the constitution, disagreements and differences were apt
to follow.

# II

With dissatisfaction over the composition and character of the
Assembly, it is not surprising that the communists attacked the draft
constitution as well. In their opinion speeches of the members were
dull, long worded and mock debates that underlined not only the antipeople
and anti-democratic character of the regime but demonstrated
the intentions of the Congress leaders to impose a steel frame
constitution as an effective instrument to safeguard the Fascist rule.
Long drawn debates on the provisions[^/18] of the constitution were seen
as a Congress conspiracy to protect the country's landlord capitalist
interests.

The communists regarded the preamble of the constitution
unrepresentative of the people because it failed to represent the
aspirations of the workers and the peasants. They rather defined it be a
masterpiece of hypocrisy and saw in it a real deal of surrender to
imperialism that was hidden from the masses. They challenged the
sovereign character of the Republic for being at the same time a member
of the Commonwealth, which recognised the king of England as the
titular head which to them meant a frank acceptance of imperialist
policies and subordinate position. Nehru was severely condemned in
this regard and they saw a complete subservience of his Government
to the British thereby becoming the main agency through which war
and national enslavement were being foisted on the people of India.
Hence according to the communists under standing instead of
embodying the sovereignty of the Indian nation the Constitution
enslaved it to the British imperialists.[^/19]

The communists opposed and reacted strongly to Nehru's
'Objective Resolution'.[^/20] While Nehru, with the support of the majority
in the Assembly, conceptualized the resolution for making India a
sovereign democratic republic, ensuring a broad based progressive
development to aid its peaceful and historical advance towards a
socialist future the communists tabled an amendment that was ruled
out of order. They feared that even if the resolution dealt with the
establishment of an independent sovereign republic it did nothing more
than show how it could be achieved.

The communists opposed the constitutional federal scheme also
because the provinces were not given residuary powers and there was
no right of secession to linguistic and cultural national units.[^/21] Nehru's
framework envisaged a strong centre possessing residuary powers and
capable of ensuring peace, coordinating vital matters of common
concern and able to speak effectively for the whole country in the
international sphere. The communists criticized the federal provisions
and wanted linguistic and cultural national units which would have the
unfettered right of self-determination to decide freely whether they
wanted to join the Indian Union or form a separate sovereign state.[^/22]
Obviously Nehru's framework was guided by his nationalist urge
whereas the communists which in theory gave cultural and linguistic
minorities the right to secession. As a nationalist Nehru viewed the
position in terms of India's unity whereas the communists viewed it in
terms of their theory.

They condemned Congress leadership for not properly dealing with
the problem of minorities.[^/23] They supported the decision of the
Assembly to liquidate all imperial privileges and weightage but at the
same time proposed statutory reservation for minorities according to
their population. They underlined the absolute necessity of reservation
in services for the period of transition and did not consider mere
presence of an adequate share consistent with efficiency sufficient and
expected much more from the Congress leadership.[^/24]

The communists keenly observed the debates on the interim report
on the Fundamental Rights, and criticised many of its features. The
Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles of State Policy were
designed by the Assembly to bring about the great reforms of the social
revolution. K.M. Panikkar considered both the Rights and the Principles
as source and inspiration for reform legislation. He stated, "under their
aegis the Indian Parliament has been active in the matter of social
legislation, whether it be called by the Hindu code or by another
name".[^/25] The communists visualised a dismal picture with the rights
reflecting the policeman's point of view instead of a free India. They
opposed provisions that empowered the Government to ban meetings,
processions and demonstrations. They wanted to curtail the wide powers
of bureaucracy and the police because to them these rendered
Fundamental Rights illusory. They argued that the constitution
ruthlessly limited and destroyed the liberties of the people in relation
to freedom of speech, organization and the press, etc. They advocated
free press from the control of a handful of monopolists.

They regarded democratic principles embodied in the constitution
to be a mere pretence because of the restrictions and the safeguards
which to them had practically denied and limited them. The constitution
in their view had buried the Fundamental Rights because the state owned
little responsibility in ensuring these rights. The Fundamental Rights
were further weakened because the right to work, leisure, equal pay
and education were relegated to the Directive Principles which were
not enforceable by any court. The State had no obligation to implement
these principles nor could the people demand their fulfilment.[^/26]

Fundamental Rights guaranteed, in communist view, the
unrestricted freedom for exploitation. They apprehended that freedom
of speech, people's liberties and press was so much circumscribed to
be the weapons for oppressing the people. They also regretted that while
these rights were negated by their limitations, the other important rights
like the right to picket, the right to strike and the right to bear arms
were not mentioned. They explained absence of these rights as its aim
to suppress the rising power of the people. Provisions regarding the
arrest and imprisonment of citizens were considered as outrageous and
hypocritical part of the constitution.

Communists failed to view constitution as an instrument to change
and rebuild society for the common welfare of the people. Austin,
however, underlined that "Fundamental Rights of other constitutions
might have served as well as --- or even better than --- those of the Indian
constitution in protecting the existing rights and liberties of the people. Indian
Constitution has provided so much impetus towards changing
and rebuilding society for the common good.[^/27]

Because of the Congress dominance in the constituent Assembly
and the class character of the Congress, the communists seriously
doubted the basic objective of the Constitution to eradicate social evils.
They believed that the social oppressions would not be removed because
the Congress leaders were 'tyrant caste ridden Hindus and enemies of
the untouchables.' They rather suspected that the educational and
economic backwardness of the untouchables would increase under the
constitution.[^/28]

The communists widely differed from Nehru on the compensation
clause in article 31 providing that compensation must be paid for all
property for public purposes. Legislature could prescribe different
principles for the payment of property acquired for different purposes.
While Nehru strongly supported and recommended the provisions, the
communists thoroughly condemned it, because in their view the Article
guaranteed the property and the privileges of the vested interests against
the mass of toilers. In retrospect it may, however, be argued that the
communists were on a solid ground in criticizing the compensation
clause in Article 31. While Nehru was trying to convince himself that
Parliament being supreme, the constitution would not stand in the way
of social reforms particularly land reforms, the communists criticised
the provisions of article 31 on the ground that they would stand in the
way of land reforms. In the light of the above it is not difficult to discern
why the communists defined the constitution 'a bourgeois constitution'.
They viewed it as a product of conspiracy of Indian capitalists through
their Congress representatives who 'sold away the freedom of the
country by striking a deal with British imperialism through the Cabinet
Mission and Mountbatten Plan to jointly rule over the people in the
interest of the Indo--British capitalist classes'. The whole process was
seen as a plot against the working class and the Indian people because
it denied the fundamental rights of the working class and the toilers
and was meant for the upper class to rule the oppressed millions.

Western dominance irritated the communists as they realized that
apart from the British dominance America also influenced the Indian
system. The Americans were called the new masters and the Nehru
Government had become subservient to the imperialists and taken India
into the Anglo--American camp. Good profits were ensured to foreign
capitalists at the cost of the working class and people's movement. It
was charged that under their dictates the Nehru Government had fallen
into their trap to convert India into a war base. Instead of confiscating
the industries and assets owned by Indian and foreign profiteers the
foreign vested interests were promised complete freedom to subjugate
India. Imposition of enormous taxes on the people had also benefited
their interests. This evidently embodied in the constitution, 'the rule of
the Indian capitalists, landlords and the princes working in cooperation
with the imperialists.'[^/29] Little did the communists realize they too were
blamed for their loyalty towards the Soviet bloc.

A clear indication of the influence of the 1936 Soviet constitution
in their critical approach was visible. The communists condemned the
Indian constitution for its failure to ensure economic equality
emphasizing that the economic foundation of the U.S.S.R. was based
on the socialist system of economy characterized by the public
ownership of the means of production.[^/30] They built their argument on
the contention that if equality was not considered in the means of
production (social ownership of the means of production) it was a
deceptive equality.

They quoted Stalin to criticise the Fundamental Rights and the
accompanying safeguards.[^/31] The communists believed that the
democratic principles were merely a pretence because the restrictions
and safeguards practically denied their benefits to the masses. In regard
to the state responsibility to ensure the rights they found the Indian
constitution to be weaker in comparison to the soviet constitution
because the right to work was ensured by the socialist organization of
the national economy. To the communists the difference between a
democratic people's constitution and the constitution of a bourgeois
state that upheld a social order for the benefit of a few and the
exploitation of many millions, was too obvious.

Apart from the ideological consideration that guided the
communists assessment of the Indian constitution in the light of the
Soviet constitution, they were also impressed by the phenomenal
progress towards socialism that the Soviet Union had made during the
pre-war period under the Stalin constitution. They saw in these triumphs
the complete superiority of the socialist system over the capitalist
system, the superiority of Stalin's policies over all other policies. And
the policies of the Anglo--Americans (whose philosophy had inspired
the Indian constitution) in their drive for world domination spelt national
enslavement of the people and oppression at the hands of the capitalist
monopolies.

In their campaign against the constitution they tried to expose it as
an instrument of class domination in contrast to the provisions of the
Soviet constitution. They denounced the constitution as a product of
war mongers, a conspiracy hatched against the Soviet Union and China',
because it was framed by the Nehru Government that was considered
to be in the war mongers' camp through its membership of the British
commonwealth.[^/32] Hence they opposed the constitution and called upon
the people to organise strikes, processions and demonstrations against
it.[^/33] Nehru saw these demonstrations as political provocation for
disrupting the administration something which was not acceptable to
him. The differences between them widened further.

In the debates of the Assembly the communists saw a struggle
between two opposing forces --- democracy and authoritarianism --- waged
by mass of the people on the one hand and a handful of vested interests
on the other.[^/34] They did observe that Nehru led the liberal elements
and they distinguished Nehru from Patel and the rightists in the
Assembly. Nehru was considered to be the leader of the former trend
supporting the mass of the people while Patel guided the interests of
the handful of vested group.[^/35] But they did not cooperate with Nehru
because the compromise between the two factions was unacceptable
to them.

It is interesting to note that both Nehru and the communists were
aware of the differences among members of the Assembly. Nehru did
not press his views too far least they should go against national interests
and unity and he regarded differences to be a healthy sign of awareness
among the members. He stressed on the need to achieve the objectives
in unanimity and cooperation because he wanted to maintain the unity
of the nation, an idea that had dominated the Congress throughout the
struggle for freedom. The need to assimilate varying views to maintain
broader principles of Indian anomalisms guided Nehru's approach to
constitution making. Moreover, Nehru was also the Prime Minister,
and had the responsibility of steering the country through the most
difficult and trying period's of Indian history. Differences on
constitutional provinces could threaten party unity and weaken the
government. Compromise was thus inherent in the logic of the situation.

Such compromises on vital issue of the provisions of the
constitution were, however, not acceptable to the communists. They
were thus unable and unwilling to cooperate with Nehru. In this context
they not only differed with but differed even among themselves. Some
of them even challenged the right of the assembly to frame a
constitution,[^/36] whereas Nehru was ready to compromise, because the
assembly and not British Parliament was to frame the constitution. Both
the communists and Nehru were convinced that the assembly was a
non-revolutionary body created by the British but Nehru never accepted
this as a threat and was confident to carry its proceedings free from the
interference of the British. The communists on the other hand could
never reconcile on this issue and always apprehended the British
dominance.

The phase of Nehru's relations with the Indian communists reveals
the initial conflict within the broad framework of their ideological
tussle. The communists were rather late in appreciating the strength of
nationalism and failed to understand (the criticism of Nehru against
them) that situations differ in each country. They decided to go along
the constitutional way envisaged by Nehru when they could not
implement their line (as tried in Telangana) not because they accepted
it but because they found no alternative to political identity for which
they compromised ideologically.


[^/1]: Upendra Baxi, "The Recovery of Fire: Nehru and Legitimization of Power in India",
_Economic and Political Weekly_, vol.25, no.2, January 13, 1990, pp. 107--112.


[^/2]: Jawaharlal Nehru, "A Constituent Assembly for India", Lausanne February 25, 1936. _Jawaharlal Nehru Papers_, Vol.II, pp.55--56, NMML.


[^/3]: Somnath Lahiri (Bengal) P. Sundarayya (Andhra) were proposed as candidates
but Lahiri was the only elected member till July 1947. For our study therefore we
rely on his participation and the communist view outside the Assembly helps us in
imparting valuable information regarding the communist attitude.


[^/4]: CPI put up 108 candidates for 1585 seats and won 8 in provincial Legislative
elections (1946). They managed to win 3 out of 3 seats in Bengal.


[^/5]: The Communist Party in a resolution in September 1942 declared India to be the
home of many nationalities and each distinct nationality was given the right to a
sovereign or autonomous state within the Indian federation or union with the right
to secede if it so desired. Andhras, Karnatakis, Marathis and Bengalis were some
of the examples of distinct nationalities. See G.Adhikari, _Pakistan and National
Unity_, Bombay, 1944, p.8.


[^/6]: P.C. Joshi's statement, Bombay, October 12, 1945, _The Indian Annual Register_,
July--December 1945, Vol.II, p.121.


[^/7]: A.S.R. Chari opposed the resolution, New Delhi, December 12, 1946, See, _People's
Age_, December 29, 1946, Vol. V (26), p.12.


[^/8]: P.C. Joshi's statement, December 9, 1946. _People's Age_, December 15, 1946, vol.v
(24), p.1.


[^/9]: G. Adhikari 'week in Review', _People's Age_, August 18, 1946, Vol. V(7), p.5.


[^/10]: Ranesh Chandra, "Who's among India's Constituent Assembly Candidates",
_People's Age_, July 21, 1946, Vol.v(3), p.4.


[^/11]: Communist Party Memorandum to the Cabinet Mission', April 15, 1946, _Marxist
Miscellany_, Vol.I (15), p.23.


[^/12]: Nehru to the Editor, _Amrita Bazar Patrika_ (1945), J.N. Papers, Vol.XIX (1289)
NMML (no date).


[^/13]: Nehru indicated his views on separate electorates when Anbian, President All India
Kshatriya Nadir Association, asked for the representation of Nadir community.
Nehru to Prof. A.J. Anbin, August 25, 1946, J.N. Papers, Vol.iii (183) NMML.


[^/14]: For further reference see f.n. no.18.


[^/15]: The communists argument that their intention to contest the elections was to capture
power and to break the constitution from within. See statements by E.M.S.
Nambidirpad and A.K. Gopalan, _Indian Express_, July 9, 1969. _Also see_ Editorial,
"Communist Party and Constituent Assembly", _People's Age_, July 21, 1946,
Vol.v(3), p.5.


[^/16]: _Crossroads_, December 23, 1949, Vol.I (16), p.16.


[^/17]: _Crossroads_, December 16, 1949, Vol.I (15), p.2.


[^/18]: Communists differed primarily on the preamble, the 'objective resolution', the
federal scheme, the minorities, the fundamental rights and the directive principles.


[^/19]: _Ibid_., p.3.


[^/20]: Nehru did not like the term 'Objective Resolution'. He found it a prosaic description
because the Resolution embodied more than mere objectives.


[^/21]: Somnath Lahiri tabled an amendment. See _People's Age_, December 29, 1946,
Vol.v(26), p.3.


[^/22]: "Communist Resolution for Constituent Assembly: Declaration of Independence",
_People's Age_, December 15, 1946, Vol.v(24), p.1. The Central Committee of the
CPI, Bombay, adopted the resolution to be introduced by Lahiri.


[^/23]: A.S.R. Chari, "Review of Constituent Assembly's Discussions on Minority Rights.
Justice to Minorities: Bed Rock of a Strong Democratic State", _People's Age_,
September 7, 1947, Vol.vi (10), p.5.


[^/24]: _Ibid_., pp.5,10.


[^/25]: K.M. Panikkar, _Hindu Society at the Crossroads_, Bombay, 1955, p.52.


[^/26]: "Fundamental Rights Buried by New Constitution", _Crossroads_, December 13,
1949, Vol.I (16), p. 16.


[^/27]: Granville Austin, _The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a Nation_, Oxford, 1966,
p.3.


[^/28]: "Manifesto of CC of the CPI on New Constitution", _Crossroads_, January 13, 1950,
Vol.I(19), p.3.


[^/29]: When the Assembly was discussing the constitutional Draft, Pravda declared that
the object of the constitutions was to strengthen the interests of the bourgeois and
the capitalists. It was alleged that the Indian constitution had embodied the
characteristics of all bourgeois constitutions; the private ownership of land, forests,
factories, mills and other means of production, the exploitation of man by man,
the existence of the exploiters and the exploited insecurity for the toiling majority
and luxury for the idle but security for minority. J.A. Naik, _Soviet Policy Towards
India_, Delhi, 1970, p.39 and "Real Character of Constitution: Surrender to
Imperialism", _Crossroads_, December 16, 1949, vol.I(15), p.2.


[^/30]: B.T. Ranadive, "The Indian constitution", _Indian Left Review_, March-April, 1971,
Vol.I(2), p.44.


[^/31]: _Crossroads_, December 23, 1949, vol.ii(16), p.16. "From the standpoint of
democratics bourgeois Constitutions may be divided into two groups. One Group
of constitutions openly denies or actually nullifies the equality of rights of citizens
and Democratic liberties. The other group is of constitutions which readily accept
and even advertise democratic principles but at the same time make reservations
and provide for restrictions which utterly mutilate these democratic rights and
liberties.


[^/32]: _Crossroads_, January 13, 1950, _op. cit._, p.3.


[^/33]: _Crossroads_, December 16, 1949, op.ci.t, p.3.


[^/34]: "On the Campaign Against the New Constitution", P.B. Circular No. 1/50, January
3, 1950.


[^/35]: A.S.R. Chari, "How Governors Got Special Powers in the Constitution, _People's
Age_, August 31, 1947, vol.vi(9), p.5.


[^/36]: Jyoti Basu in West Bengal Legislative Assembly, September 1, 1948, quoted in
Umakant Tiwary, _The Indian Constitution_, Allahabad, 1961, p.33; S.V. Ghate later
revealed that they wanted the Constituent Assembly to frame a constitution for
India; See S.V. Ghate, Transcript of Interview, Recorded on July 9, 1970, p.218,
NMML.
