## Preface

Once I had to drive a Mumbai ATS inspector across the city. He chatted about his B.A. degree (he too had studied Sociology), took an interest in my Ph.D. dissertation ("poor, young girls were initiated into nunhood"), recommended the SUV that zipped past us ("value for money"). But we were not out sight-seeing. In the rear seat was sitting a young man whose brother had been literally plucked by the ATS from the Delhi Police Special Cell, which he was helping track down some suspects. He was then charged with conspiring the July 2011 Zaveri bazar blast in Mumbai. The ATS had now come calling on this young man, to take him to Mumbai, ostensibly to 'question' him. But questioning often means warrantless arrests, illegal detention and torture leading to leaked stories in the media and charges of terrorism.

The ATS team had arrived in the middle of a press conference. This effectively frustrated their simple enough plan to carry away Nadeem[^1] for uninterrupted interrogation in the comforts of their police station. Slightly irritated at our presence, and shivering from the assault of the Delhi December cold, the Assistant Commissioner of Police (ACP) who headed the team began to inquire from this young man. The gist of his inquisition was this:

>"What did your brother tell the Special Cell?"
>
>"Wouldn't it be simpler to pose this question to the Special Cell?", we asked.
>
>"Protocol".

Apparently, the protocol is to whisk away suspects, or even their brothers.

So, now, here we were, discussing sociology, Jain nuns and large cars, headed towards Nadeem's house for a search, at the other end of the city.

>"Why do you illegally detain suspects?", I turned to a less pleasant topic. "How would it hurt to send summons to those you wish to interrogate?"
>
>The Inspector looked genuinely hurt. "Illegal detention? Never. We always take the person out for a walk after 23 hours."

It was one of those tragi-comic moments when one isn't sure whether to laugh or to cry. Here was an officer of law telling us that the legal requirement of producing an arrestee before a magistrate within 24 hours could be circumvented 'legally'.

This brief encounter was but a glimpse into the ease with which norms are institutionally subverted. It also gave us a first hand experience of the dread of being pursued. When every knock on the door, every ring of the phone makes your stomach churn; when the grey of the evening appears full of foreboding. But worst of all, the knowledge that no one may be able to help you from being taken away. The stories in Section I bear the imprint of this terror, felt as a visceral force. Some months after the above incident, I chanced upon a letter sent out by an accused in the Mumbai train bombings of 2006. The address was marked Anda Cell, Arthur Road prison. It was a grim chronicle of Ehtesham Qutub's 75-day-long custody in the ATS. One name leapt out of this letter of horror. It was the name of the Inspector.

He, who had amiably offered expert comments to me on my Ph.D. thesis, sympathizing with girls "who were tortured into becoming nuns," played a starring role in the letter as the master of ceremonies, conducting and executing a regimen of excruciating pain on the man under his power. This letter appears in "Dr. Narco and other Stories", which recounts the centrality of torture and cavalier prejudice in the Mumbai train blasts investigations. But this affliction is not unique to the Mumbai ATS; Section I shows these to be fundamental to all terror investigations: the Uttar Pradesh STF working on the Katcheri blasts of 2006, the Special Cell of Delhi Police which abducted the Intelligence Bureau (IB) informers and produced them in a dramatic press conference as Al Badr operatives; the Hyderabad Crime Branch --- these agencies acting sometimes in collusion, at other times in competition, all tied tenuously by the shadowy IB.

Nothing compares to the fear of the early days. With time, however, the long arm of law manages to transform this palpable terror into a dull, unending ache. Section II explores the criminal justice framework of counterterrorism. Terror cases are prosecuted under the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act. Promulgated originally in 1967, the UAPA enabled the Centre to declare an organization as unlawful if it was of the opinion that the association "has become an unlawful association". Amended repeatedly since then, the ambit of 'unlawful' has been an ever-growing circle of acts and actors, strengthening the subjective basis of its application, virtually creating a suspicion state. Opposing Prevention of Terrorism Act (POTA) introduced by the NDA government, S Jaipal Reddy had laid out four grounds of objection to the legislation: "First, it is destructive of the basic democratic liberties; second, it has been demonstrated empirically in our own country that this is a remedy worse than the malady; third, it has been prompted, by malignant political motives; and fourth, it jettisons the basic established principles of criminal jurisprudence without a necessary protective shield."[^2] However, the Parliament attack provided the NDA government an opportunity to push it through in a joint session of Parliament. Almost as a replay, the Mumbai attack in November 2008 drummed up support for a tough law against terror in the form of the amended Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA).

Short of admitting confession as evidence --- to L.K. Advani's eternal irritation --- the new, improved UAPA 2008 looked remarkably similar to Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act (TADA) --- which incidentally P Chidambaram had inaugurated in 1987 as Minister of State for Home. It extended the period of remand to 180 days while rendering the bail provisions extremely stringent. Appealing to his colleagues to pass the amended bill without insisting on a referral to the Standing Committee, Chidambaram assured them that Parliament could "revisit the Bills and make the improvements in course of time". Indeed, he promised, "If any improvements have to be done, we can always come back and look at the Bill when we meet again in February."[^3] The Parliament has only returned to the law to add more muscle to it.

In 2008, UAPA defined new offences such as terror funding and holding of terror camps, and voila you will suddenly find these charges surfacing in the FIRS --- though with the sketchiest possible details. In 2013 the Parliament explicitly incorporated economic offences under the definition of terrorist acts. Amendment of Section 15 now declares the production, smuggling and circulation of "high quality counterfeit currency" as a terrorist offence, and not simply a financial one that was up till now dealt with under Sections 489B, 489C, 489D of the IPC. Punjab Police's partiality towards TADA's powerful provisions, or Maharashtra Police's quick recourse to Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act (MCOCA) over ordinary criminal law, has been too well documented to not know that police favour draconian laws when they are available.

What firmly entrenches UAPA into the slippery territory of conspiracy, intentions and knowledge', and away from specific, tangible and verifiable acts, is the introduction of a new section, which criminalizes the raising of funds "from a legitimate or illegitimate source ... knowing that such funds are likely to be used ... by a terrorist organization" ... "_notwithstanding whether such funds were actually used or not used_" for the commission of a terrorist act.[^4] Knowledge that monies could be used for terrorist acts will be difficult to prove in a court of law but it will effectively render suspect a variety of legal transactions: a movement raising funds to carry on its campaigns, a madrasa seeking contributions to rebuild its walls or replenish its library; or ageing parents receiving remittances from a child working overseas. Our police have only to suspect the people receiving monies for them to be put away in jails.

There is no study to prove that a tough law acts as deterrence against terrorism --- howsoever one may choose to define the term. What we do have is ample evidence of such laws leading to gross violations of citizens' rights: illegal detentions, torture, false cases, long periods of incarceration --- a wholesale recipe for 'disaffection', in fact. In the decade of its existence, 76,036 individuals were arrested for crimes under TADA. Of these, only one per cent ended in a conviction.[^5] Similarly, at the time of its repeal, in 2004, 1031 persons were arrested under POTA. Trial was finally completed with regard to 18 of which 13 were convicted.[^6] A national audit of UAPA trials and convictions is yet to be undertaken, but we do know that the investigating agencies dress up their conviction rates by including convictions under Arms Act or Explosive Substances Act under their terror conviction records.

Even as confessions are not admissible as evidence under UAPA, they are rather useful in constructing a mythology of guilt. Dossiers fattened on Interrogation Reports and disclosures have made the reputations of many national security experts. At least some essays in this collection are a direct response to the security commonsense of these experts. "Sinful Liberals and the Investigative Bias" is a retort to these experts who insist on the absence of prejudice in anti-terror investigations --- that those acquitted by courts are not necessarily innocent and that investigative agencies are merely trying to go about their business, making a few wrong arrests in good faith. But more dangerously, the argument that in these times of terror, we should all agree to overlook the niceties of constitutional guarantees. Such a line of thought was propagated frenziedly in the press last year (2013) as the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) began to inquire into the truth behind the killing of Ishrat Jahan. "Why the Ishrat Jahan Case frightens our Commentators" was written in the middle of that maelstrom.

Though this collection of essays covers the period beginning 2001 --- the year of 9/11, the Parliament attack, the ban on Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) --- India's counterterrorism policies have a hoarier lineage. "Death by Encounter" attempts to trace the genealogy of extra-judicial killings, from the slaying of Naxalites during the Emergency, to KPS Gill's doctrine of rampant extermination in Punjab in the 1980s.

Every narrative has its milestones. The attack on Mumbai in 2008 --- "India's 26/11" --- occupies a preeminent place in the history of terrorism in India. From the debris of this attack arose the vision of a techno-security state, a new lexicon of homeland security imported from post-9/11 USA, and a new market for surveillance and security solutions. This vision of a hard State - with its tough anti-terror laws, an overarching national terrorism centre, invasive technologies of mapping and monitoring population --- began to be pushed in earnest by the corporate world. Numerous reports and surveys by FICCI, CII, ASSOCHAM and consultancy firms on homeland security attest to the welding of ideological and material interests in this emerging security-industrial complex. Section III explores precisely this.


[^1]: Name changed.

[^2]: S Jaipal Reddy, Lok Sabha Debates on approval of Prevention of Terrorism (Second) Ordinance, 2002, promulgated by the President on 18 March 2002.

[^3]: P Chidambaram, Combined discussion on the motion for consideration of the National Investigation Agency Bill, 2008 and the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Amendment Bill, 2008. Bills passed on 17 December 2008.

[^4]: For a detailed critique of the 2012 amendments to UAPA, [_Reject Amendments to UAPA: An Appeal to Members of the Rajya Sabha_](https://web.archive.org/web/20210923181013/https://kafila.online/2012/12/04/reject-amendments-to-uapa-an-appeal-to-members-of-the-rajya-sabha/); See also, Statement released by Jamia Teachers' Solidarity Association, [_Passage of Amendments to UAPA: Further Erosion of Constitutional Rights_](https://web.archive.org/web/20180703183419/https://www.countercurrents.org/jtsa211212.htm) .

[^5]: _Colonial Continuities: Human Rights, Terrorism and Security Laws in India_ by Anil Kalhan, Gerald P. Conroy, Mamta Kaushal, Sam Scott Miller and Jed. S. Rakoff, Columbia Journal of Asian Law (20:1), 2005, p. 148. See Chapter IV "Contemporary Antiterrorism Laws"

[^6]: Figures revealed by the former Home Minister Shivraj Patil on 11 May 2005. See "556 still detained under POTA: Patil", _Milli Gazette_, 16-30 June 2005.
