## Death by Encounter

Early in the film, we see Nana Patekar walk into his house. He is laden with vegetables, bottle gourd, leafy coriander, the tools and symbols of homeliness. His wife is on the phone cooing instructions to someone about a sambhar recipe. Asafoetida (what is _qayam_ in Hindi, she asks her husband, who mouths '_heeng_' to her) and ghee are the keys to a good sambhar she assures the person on the other side of the phone. And then she pushes her husband to the bathroom, pointing in the same good-natured way she was sharing her sambhar recipe, to the bloodstains on his white shirt. There is something exceedingly violent in this scene of domestic bliss. More violent than the ease with which Patekar has just been shown, moments ago, blowing the brains out of a gangster, his brag about his two mistresses in Kamathipura cut off in mid sentence.

The sweet domesticity doesn't contrast with the gritty violence of the highway. It is of a piece with it. This violence travels easily into the home. It has been normalized, naturalized, absorbed. It doesn't rankle, or prick. The rituals of daily life carried out with nonchalance immediately after the execution, reflect the acceptance of this kind of violence.

That was Patekar in _Ab Tak Chhappan_ (56 and counting) reprising Pradeep Sharma's crime branch cop, whose killing count exceeded 105, at a time in his career when possibly his score was only on the half way mark.[^62] There was a spate of films celebrating the exploits of the Mumbai 'encounter cops', some stylish and well crafted, but many simply crude. But were they manufacturing a public opinion in favour of vigilante justice or merely reflecting our society's condoning, if not overt approval of the phenomenon of extra judicial killing? The insularity of the Mumbai film industry may have led its filmmakers to recognize these killings and their film-worthiness only in the 1990s or later, when the streets of Mumbai, then Bombay, turned red with the blood of gangsters being felled equally by rival gangs and the crime branch. But as early as 1977, immediately after the Emergency, Jai Prakash Narayan constituted an inquiry committee headed by V.M. Tarkunde, to inquire into 77 cases of killings by police. Those killed were alleged to be Naxalites; these figures were drawn from the state of Andhra Pradesh alone --- though killings were recognized to be widespread in Orissa and West Bengal as well --- during the period of Emergency.

Read the Tarkunde Committee's report, _Encounters are Murders_, and cry. It could have been written today, the methods of elimination have hardly changed. The modus operandi of these killings was established early in the life our Republic. In its interim report released a month after it was founded, the Committee released facts about three encounters it had managed to investigate thus far. Two of these --- said to have occurred in Giraipally forest and Chilakalagutta forest --- in which a total of eight people were killed, "never took place", the Committee concluded. There were witnesses who saw them being taken away by the police from their homes; witnesses who saw them being tortured brutally in police custody; witnesses, in the second encounter case, who saw them being driven away in a police vehicle covered with tarpaulin, while the men inside screamed and pleaded that they were being taken away to be killed; and finally, in the first encounter, even a witness, who saw them being shot in cold blood by the police, less than 50 feet away, as he stood hidden in the darkness of the Giraipally forest.

There was ample circumstantial evidence to "cast serious doubts on the official reports" about the third encounter of two "unidentified Naxalites" --- one of whom was later identified as Neelam Ramachandriah, an exMLC. Ramachandriah, it was confirmed by witnesses, had been present in Vijaywada the night before the encounter allegedly took place in Yulladu forests, eighty kilometers away, with no direct bus link.[^63]

But again, just as our methods of killing were perfected early, so were the means to thwart justice. The explosive findings of the Tarkunde Committee forced the Janata government to form the Justice Bhargava Commission. Indeed, the Tarkunde Committee had emphasized political patronage and government complicity in the encounters and demanded the institution of an independent commission of inquiry. However, any possibilities for justice were foreclosed by the Commission's narrow terms of reference, excluding from its purview the apportioning of responsibility for the murders. But even when assured of protection from prosecution, the state government declined to submit official documents, in many cases destroying them. Witnesses who deposed before the Commission were hounded and threatened, and finally, when a witness, K Lalitha testified that no less than the IG of the state had personally supervised her torture, the state practically disallowed the Commission to function. Somewhere perhaps the report of the Commission exists, but it was never published though officially submitted. None of those who carried out the killings in the Garaipally forests were ever punished.[^64]

K Balagopal's reports from the ground through the 1980s indicate that the lifting of Emergency had little impact on killings by the police. If anything, the scale and severity only increased. Where Vengal Rao, home minister during the Congress regime, had preened about his government 'wiping out Naxalites', Vasant Nageswar Rao, home minister in the NTR government, described encounters as "routine affair". A police force reared on a robust diet of impunity to torture and kill was now being fattened with cash rewards. Even if we dismiss the rumour of Rs 20,000 for each head as mere hearsay, the Home Minister did hold public meetings to disburse cash rewards to policemen involved in encounter killings.[^65]

With KPS Gill's arrival in Punjab, the headhunting and bounty system was formalized. Allegations swirled that letters were dispatched to all district senior superintendents sanctioning rewards in exchange for arrest or liquidation of "wanted extremists/terrorists". A list with 53 names and addresses was appended with the instructions.[^66] Earlier this year in 2013, a sub inspector Surjit Singh announced before the media that he had killed 83 Sikh youth in fake encounters in the 1990s at the prompting of his seniors, in particular naming SSP Paramjit Singh Gill. "I was a constable (sipahi) and I was promoted as SHO. What was the reason for it? --- that I and Gill Sahib both know", reflecting the institutionalisation of the incentive to kill.[^67]

Such was KPS Gill's power, and so beyond reproach and question was his encounter policy that Governor Virender Verma was transferred to another state when he declared his intention to end the reign of false encounters. Gill accused Verma of demoralizing the police force when his advisor as well as the Home Secretary recommended action against police officers involved in the torture and subsequent execution --- passed off predictably as a killing in self defence --- of two students Harpal Singh and Baljit Singh in June 1990.[^68]

It must be remembered that in March 1988 both houses of the Parliament passed the 59th amendment, which suspended all rights including the right to life in the state of Punjab. For close to five years, the right to life did not exist in this state, with the approval of the Parliament. However, as has been said, the suspension of the right to life did not automatically confer upon the police forces the right to kill.[^69] But this is precisely what happened. Dogged and courageous campaigners went about documenting these abuses at great personal peril --- in many cases it proved fatal, as they were eliminated by those whose excesses they were recording. Jaswant Singh Khalra calculated the number of dead and the disappeared from the amount of wood consumed by various crematoria; there were numerous reports carrying the testimonies of families who had witnessed their sons being taken away --- the lucky ones were returned the bodies of their sons; countless others just disappeared, ending either in the crematoria or dumped in the numerous canals and waterways of Punjab. In many of these documents, police officers or the dreaded men of Criminal Investigation Agency (CIA) are named, registration numbers of vehicles which ferried away men from their homes and fields are provided --- on the occasion that the vehicles bore number plates, police stations where they were taken are recounted. Iqbal Singh for instance recounted to Ram Narayan Kumar --- one of the foremost chroniclers of this period --- in detail about his torment at the hands of CIA staff at Ladha Kothi, an interrogation centre, later converted into a jail. He could recognize the officers who abducted him, those who supervised his humiliation and torture; as well as the men who were taken out each night to be killed in fake encounters.[^70]

Despite the meticulous documentation by Sikh and human rights groups of utter contempt of the Punjab police for rule of law, and despite the termination of virtual emergency, accountability has been near nil. Successive governments, even those headed by Akali Dal, whose own members had borne the brunt of the police rule, continued to protect those responsible for the killing, maiming, torture and disappearance of thousands in the state.

### The State's Strategies

Nearly 67 years after independence, we are still struggling for this minimum: that after every killing arising from police action, the police be required to prove that they killed in self defense. Article 21, the right to life, should have been an automatic guarantor of this. We have seen, however, that the State is far too reluctant to grant the citizens this right, affording itself and its agencies a position above law. The response of the State has been along three interrelated lines --- and it has remained stunningly committed to this line of argument. Its first strategy is to unleash a barrage of such breathtakingly sterile language that it overwhelms you with its officialese --- a leaden bureaucratic deflection of issues.

Between 1982, when the UN passed a resolution to appoint a special rapporteur to examine the occurrence and extent of the practice of extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and 2011, when India finally extended a standing invitation to the mandate-holders of all thematic special procedures of the Human Rights Council, the UN Special Rapporteur made do with communications with the Government of India. Year after year, the special rapporteurs would record in their annual reports India's reluctance, silence in fact, on their wish to visit India to examine the allegations of encounters and executions, and lament its non cooperation with the UN's mandate. Official communications were raised to an art of obfuscation.

In August 1992, the UN Special Rapporteur wrote to the Government of India about 95 cases of alleged extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions --- in two of these, the victims were said to be minors.[^71]

A few months later, the GOI responded, not with any details about the 95 cases, but with the happy news of the decision taken at a chief ministers' conference to set up a national human rights commission. The purpose of the Commission, claimed the missive, was "to instill a sense of confidence in the Indian people regarding the commitment of the Government and society at large to the cause of human rights." "Any human rights violations anywhere in India should be dealt with sternly", the CMs' conference piously resolved.[^72]

In a subsequent 'communication', the Special Rapporteur was informed that "even in States so affected by terrorism and insurgency as Jammu and Kashmir, to which most of the allegations related, the law enforcement officials performed their obligations in accordance with the Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials. Every allegation of human rights violations was scrupulously investigated and most of them were found inaccurate, highly exaggerated or deliberately false."[^73]

Obviously then, in such an idyllic world --- a veritable haven of human rights --- a body such as the NHRC could play only a limited role.

### Dead, Hence Guilty

A complaint by the APCLC drawing the NHRC's attention to 295 cases of encounter killings resulted in the issuance of its guidelines in 1997. At the heart of the procedure laid out was the simple rule that prima facie a death arising from police firing satisfied the ingredients of culpable homicide, necessitating registration of information and investigation. However, as the Chairperson of the NHRC wrote in his letter to the chief ministers: "under the scheme of criminal law prevailing in India, it would not be an offence if the death is caused in exercise of right of private defence. Another provision under which the police officer can justify causing the death of a person, is Section 46 of the Criminal Procedure Code."

Indeed, Section 46 of the Criminal Procedure Code is the trigger for the State's second strategy: that is to produce a narrative of guilt of those killed in encounters. This Section grants police the powers to use all means necessary to effect an arrest if the suspect uses force or attempts to evade arrest. But it also warns that "Nothing in this Section gives a right to cause the death of a person who is not accused of an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life." While it may have been intended originally to dissuade police from applying force indiscriminately, it has had the effect of presenting us with a strange paradox. A is killed; A is alleged to be guilty of crimes attracting death or life sentence; thus A has been killed in good faith; ergo the encounter is genuine. If the genuineness of an encounter killing is to be built on the guilt of the encountered, there is an immediate shift in discourse. The police only need demonstrate an allegation to justify an encounter, shifting the burden of proving their innocence on those killed. And as is well known, dead people don't talk. This is the ultimate convenience of encounter killing.

In the 1990s, when the body count was spiraling in Mumbai, two civil rights groups, the Committee for the Protection of Democratic Rights (CPDR) and the People's Union of Civil Liberties (PUCL), were moved to petition the High Court seeking an inquiry into two encounter killings in 1997: the killing of Javed Fawda alias Abu Sayama and Sada Pawle and Vijay Tandel, also said to be criminals. The Samajwadi Party also filed a petition asking for an inquiry into the killing of a criminal Javed Fawda.

Taking up the three petitions jointly, the High Court ordered an inquiry into the two encounters.[^74] The inquiry carried out by Judge AS Aguiar, principal judge of the Bombay Sessions Court, was held in February-March 1998 and submitted to the High Court in July of the same year. He declared both encounters to be fake. The High Court however did not accept the Commission's conclusions and held both encounters to be genuine. But what was significant was that Judge Aguiar's report carried a section titled, "Trigger Happy Cop" which detailed the past of API Dhobale, the policeman who had admitted to having fired at Javed Fawda. The Commission's report recalled that Assistant Police Inspector Dhobale had been convicted for the custodial death of one Abdul Gaffar Khan by the trial court in 1994. (The High Court had set the conviction aside and a SLP was pending in the Supreme Court).

Judge Aguiar noted, with a scarcely veiled disapproval, that during cross examination, API Dhobale could not even recollect the number of people he had killed in encounters: "encounter-killing it appears, is no big deal. It had become a routine affair."[^75]

The High Court, however, was none too pleased with the allusion to API Dhobale's past record, saying it had "nothing to do with the legal exercise expected to be done by the learned Inquiry Judge." On the contrary, it places great emphasis on the sworn affidavit of the Commissioner of Police and another police officer detailing the cases registered against the deceased Sada Pawie and Vijay Tandel in various police stations: "From this, it can be deduced without any hesitation that the said two deceased are the dreaded gangsters and if not notorious criminals, always indulged in committing serious offence in the Mumbai Metropolis." (sic)[^76]

Is it any surprise that the breathless commentary and the deluge of leaked 'news' surrounding the CBI's investigation into the Ishrat Jahan encounter relentlessly focused on establishing her (non-existent) Lashkar links, as though somehow that would make the cold-blooded killing of this teenager palatable, or even justified. One single piece of paper of doubtful veracity, was frenziedly hyped as a 'New' story, a 'New' document to show the "slain Mumbai resident Ishrat Jehan Raza may have been an Lashkar-e Taiba terrorist." The documents referred to here were, of course, the much-flogged paragraphs from the Interrogation Report (IR) of David Headley referring to a botched up 'Ishrat module'. Much ink was spewed on the alleged excision of these 'tell-tale' paragraphs from the NIA's Interrogation Report of David Headley, available in the public domain[^77] even while accepting that "The NIA note has little relevance to the murder investigation".[^78] Unverified tapes of doubtful origin --- alleged telephone conversations between a top Lashkar operative and his accomplices plotting the assassination of Narendra Modi --- were played out on prime time as "The Ishrat Jahan Terror Tapes", even though Ishrat was not once named in the conversation.[^79]

One journalist --- known to be close to the BJP, though prone to seeking shelter in his professional identity whenever it got uncomfortable --- said in a TV debate that regardless of which way the trial goes, once it is established in public perception that Ishrat Jahan was a terrorist, the BJP's then 'PM in waiting' could encash a political lottery out of it.

And once we have moved to this nebulous domain of guilt of the one who has died --- and is no longer 'representable' in a court of law --- the requirement that the agents of violence prove that they killed in self defense also withers away. Police's exercise of self defence becomes manifest, as though by itself.

The Lt. Governor of Delhi, in refusing to grant sanction for a magisterial inquiry in the Batla House encounter case said this:

>[W]hen the police went to apprehend the accused and they were fired upon, there was no option with them but to open fire in self defence and to arrest the accused. The modules of the Indian Mujahideen have conducted bomb explosions in various parts of the country including Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh etc. subjecting police officers, who have worked out this case at the cost of loosing [sic] a gallant colleague and nearly loosing [sic] branother would be highly demoralizing and would weaken the resolve of the police officers to fight against terrorists. A police officer confronted by armed terrorists should not have to start thinking whether to die of the firing from the militants or if the militant dies to face the magisterial enquiries which are to follow. The Crime Branch is already conducting investigation of the shootout. Two accused persons are yet to be arrested. Crime Branch is expected to file its charge sheet in the Court shortly where after the case will be subjected to due judicial scrutiny.[^80]

The Lt. Governor returns us to the tautological reasoning of guilt and murder. He deems it fit to not only pronounce his verdict in the Batla House encounter case --- without an inquiry --- but clearly settles it in favour of all police officers who must not be allowed to be 'demoralized' by magisterial enquiries which are to follow their 'fight against terrorists'. It also cleverly creates another fiction: that the crime branch is investigating the shootout. What the crime branch was investigating was the murder of Inspector Sharma. The deaths of Atif and Sajid having become inseparable from their alleged guilt --- of being terrorists of Indian Mujahideen --- apparently needed no resolution. In July this year, the sessions court convicted Shahzad Ahmed for the murder of Inspector Sharma despite the prosecution being unable to establish even his presence at the site of the encounter on that day.[^81]

Judge Shastri's order of sentencing gives us an unintended insight into what was playing on the court's mind while passing the verdict:

>Masses from entire Delhi were seen weeping and mourning the death of that brave heart (Inspector M.C. Sharma). Traumatized intellectuals from all over the country went in pensive mood. All this is evident as how said incident shocked collective conscience of the entire nation. This is also an aggravating factor against the convict.[^82]

It was not law.

### Law and Order

The corollary of this collective conscience, rather appropriately, is the vision of order that the State produces. Order, which is fragile and ever in danger of cracking and collapsing. Order, which can be held together by repression alone --- agents of which must be protected from rule of law.

Between 1999 and 2008, a clutch of writ petitions pertaining to encounter killings in Andhra Pradesh were filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in the High Court.[^83] A five-judge bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court, combining these writs framed the following questions for consideration:

>1. Where a police officer causes the death of a person, acting or purporting to act in discharge of official duties or in self-defence as the case may be, is there commission of a cognizable offence (including in an appropriate case the offence of culpable homicide); and whether the information relating to such circumstances requires to be registered as a First Information Report obligating investigation in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
>
>2. Whether the existence of circumstances bringing a case within any of the exceptions in the Indian Penal Code, 1860 including exercise of the right of private defence could be conclusively determined during investigation; whether the final report submitted by the police officer to the Magistrate on completion of the investigation is conclusive or whether the existence of the circumstances coming within the exceptions requires to be determined only in appropriate judicial proceedings?
>
>3. Whether a magisterial inquiry (whether under the Code of Criminal Procedure or extant Police Standing Orders) into the cause and circumstances of death occasioned by an act of a police officer obviate the rigor of investigation and trial of such act?
>
>4. Whether the State, the police establishment or a police officer is immune from an obligation to disclose the identity of a Police Officer who had committed an act causing the death of a person, to enable an investigating officer or any person aggrieved by such death to effectively seek justice; and if so, in what circumstances or contexts ?[^84]

A counter affidavit filed in the Andhra Pradesh High Court by the Director General of Police of the state --- in response to a petition filed by APCLC seeking the registration of crime in the offence of "killing of 8 Naxalites" in an encounter in the Nallamala forest on 23 July 2006 --- invoked the spectre of a "red corridor from Nepal to Trivandrum right across the country, posing a threat to National Integrity" (in capitals in the original). "Remote devices", "exploding landmines", "sensational cases", "creation of terror", "capture of power" summon a horrifying, fast unraveling dystopia.[^85]

The Bench's judgement was a voluminous 50,000word long, profound reading of substantive law, a meditation on Article 21 and a masterly survey of case law. The Bench's observations in response to killing by police officers was:

>On a careful consideration of the relevant statutory provisions; the binding and persuasive precedents; the normative architecture of private defense justifications generally and in the context of the provisions of the IPC; and the constitutional values that inform and structure our governance processes, we hold that the information conveyed to the officer in charge of a Police Station intimating the death of any person as a consequence of firing by law enforcement officials of the State (notwithstanding a claim as to the death occurring while exercising the right of private defence) must invariably and without exception be registered as FIR /Sec. 154(1) Cr.P.C.; and investigation u/Sections 156/157 must follow.

The AP High Court's ruling would have impeded the routine of encounter killings and created a legal precedent which would have eroded the very basis of police impunity. Within days, therefore, the Andhra Pradesh Police Officers Association rushed to the Supreme Court for a stay. The Union of India surpassed the DGP's counter affidavit with its own apocalyptic tones in its affidavit in the SC: registration of criminal cases would threaten the very existence of India as a nation state", "emasculate the functioning of security forces", and "gun wielding non State actors" would "hold the State and society to ransom".

The AP High Court in directing that all cases of encounter killings be registered as cases of culpable homicide had utterly failed to recognize, in the Union of India's view, the contract between the individual and the State that underpins a "modern liberal democratic Nation": "In terms of this contract, an individual relinquishes some of the rights of his pre-State existence in return for security of life and property guaranteed by the state. The State enforces this covenant by raising the army, the paramilitary forces and the police ..."[^86]

How pitiful that the Indian State believes itself to be no more than a protection mafia. But it's worse. Theoretically at least, the Mafioso, even the most powerful ones, could be brought to justice. The Indian State is arguing instead "none of the legal principles of the Constitution ... are applicable under this since the security forces are not acting in their private capacities, but at the behest of the state."

This, then, is the third strategy. Of enveloping it's agents in a mantle of sovereignty and immunity.

But what would heroes be without formidable villains? What about Kasab, asks the Union of India. Should we have allowed Kasab the right to get a criminal case registered against the police/NSG officers? Kasab immediately invokes the apparition of a biryani chomping, jihad-crazed terrorist undeserving of the refinements of legal procedure, and becomes indeed a shorthand for all terror accused. A former judge of the Supreme Court, Justice Arijit Parsayat, speaking at a seminar at Indian Law Institute in Delhi on the theme of 'Investigation and Prosecution of Offences relating to Terrorism', described Ajmal Kasab as "not fit to be called a human. He is an animal." Naturally, therefore, the discourse of human rights does not apply to Kasab and other animals. ("So what is required is animal rights, not human rights," said the good judge).[^87] And naturally, therefore, too, all those who argue for the rule of law, overlooking the simple dictum that human rights may not apply to a category of people are in grave error. These are the 'human rights alarmists' --- credit must go to _Economic Times_ for coining this term. In their affidavits and replies to the courts; in the public discussions, in the media and even films, human rights activists are the objects of ridicule, derision, and pure hatred --- the perfect antithesis of the policemen and the security agencies, which put their life in danger to secure the country. From KPS Gill's letter to the Prime Minister heaping scorn on the "utterly compromised human rights lobby" whose campaign against extra judicial killings had driven Gill's trusted lieutenant in Tarn Taran, SSP Ajit Singh Sandhu to suicide, in 1997, to the Police Officers Association accusation that the petitioner APCLC "directly aids and abets the unlawful activities of the underground CPI (Maoist)", to the Union of India's counteraffidavit complaining that NGOs especially persuing (sic) human rights are adept at using the legal processes of the Indian State to ... further the cause of the "revolution", human rights campaigners are set up as villains and their concerns malicious and worthy only of outright dismissal.

### Checks and Balances

There is, it is argued, an established elaborate mechanism, which sifts and sieves the evidence, through whose fine mesh no fake encounter could possibly slip by.

The first of these alleged filters is the Investigating Officer. Sure, the IO could be expected to look at the evidence to judge if his colleagues had indulged in coldblooded murder and include this in the chargesheet. Certainly, this rare manuscript must be hunted down and preserved for all. FIRs of encounter killings usually follow a template: where the deceased are booked under Section 307 of IPC along with related sections such as Arms Act, and the version provided by the police party involved in the encounter deaths is recorded as the 'facts of the case'. "The process of judicial oversight operates only after IO files the final report," claims the AP Police Officers Association. But the manner in which the IO records, investigates and then prepares the chargesheet, it is highly unlikely that the police are ever going to be subjected to judicial scrutiny.[^88]

A reply from the office of the Delhi Police Special Cell in response to a RTI seeking details of encounter killings and officers involved was this: "The requisite information/list is enclosed herewith except the name of the police personnel and officials who encountered the accused persons which is exempted under Section 8 (1) (g) of RTI Act of 2005."

Deceased equals accused in the police lexicon and procedure.

Even the FIR (448/97) first filed in the March 1997 killing of two businessmen, known famously as the Connaught Place fake encounter was registered "on the complaint of the then Inspector Anil Kumar of ISC Unit of Crime Branch". Inspector Anil Kumar was a member of the police party led by ACP SS Rathi, which shot dead Pradeep Goyal and Jagjit Singh. It was only when the family members of the dead men broke up the press conference being held by the Delhi Police to preen about the elimination of dreaded gangsters that mass outcry and bad publicity led to a CBI probe and subsequent conviction of Rathi, Anil Kumar and their juniors. The RTI reply from the Public Information Officer, Crime, New Delhi notes: "In this regard it is pertinent to mention here that initially the case was registered for encounter but later on as per the direction of the Hon'ble Court the case was converted into murder after conviction."[^89] No departmental inquiry was ever held.

To say that the police can be relied upon to ensure that fake encounters will be punished is a myth that few will believe.

The second is the magisterial inquiry, a requirement in the NHRC's procedure. In a RTI application seeking details about the number of magisterial enquiries conducted in cases of encounter killings in Delhi, it emerged --- in about six months' time and a great deal of correspondence later --- that between 1995 and 2012, a grand total of two cases of deaths in encounters had been examined by magistrates.

In one case, known as the "Sonia Vihar encounter". I was told 'unofficially' that the magisterial inquiry report was too explosive to be shared publicly. "Explosive as in damning?" Silent smiles. The 'official' line to deny me a copy of the report was that it would put to risk those who had deposed in the inquiry. Expose them to risk from whom? Those they had deposed against --- the Special Cell officers? The replies from the NHRC were more illustrative. When asked for a copy of the magisterial report and all other documents pertaining to the case --- the inquiry had been recommended by the NHRC following a complaint by the widow of the slain 'gangster' --- I was sent the proceedings of the meetings held by the NHRC. In the meeting held on 19 April 2012, the inquiry officer (Principal Secretary Revenue) complained of the non cooperation of the police which was delaying the completion of the inquiry; in the 26 September meeting, his report, which recommended a CBI inquiry, was examined and the consent of the Government of NCT of Delhi sought to initiate the inquiry; on 20 December, the Commission notes with regret the extension of time sought by the Government of NCT of Delhi. But the proceedings of 6 March 2013 are silent on whether the permission for the CBI inquiry has been finally granted. It merely records that "The Investigation Division to analyze the MER submitted by the Divisional Commissioner, Revenue Department, Government of NCT of Delhi and submit a report within six weeks."

The key accused in the "Sonia Vihar encounter" case is ACP Sanjeev Yadav, a decorated and feted officer of the Special Cell, and the protagonist of many a FIR in encounter killings in Delhi.

In March 2014, the NHRC asked the Centre to pay compensation to the family of those killed in the encounter, calling it "doubtful". It also noted that the Delhi Police continued to stubbornly ignore the NHRC guidelines for holding magisterial enquiries. This stricture has however resulted neither in the stripping of these officers of their gallantry awards nor in any punitive action.[^90]

As to the magisterial inquiry in the Swarn Jayanti Park encounter, there seemed to be no department willing to claim its possession, as the RTI application tortuously wound its way from the various sections of the Home Department to the SDM of the North West District of Delhi.[^91]

The NHRC, touted as the third pillar of this edifice of 'checks and balances', has fancied itself as a compensation disbursing body rather than ensuring prosecution of police officers.

When the Supreme Court in 1996 appointed the NHRC to examine the Punjab mass cremations, it bestowed on it its extraordinary powers to conduct thorough investigation, fix accountability as well as reparations, under Article 32 of the Constitution. But the NHRC quickly grew nervous of this wide and sweeping mandate --- possibly after SSP Sandhu's suicide and the subsequent fusillade launched by KPS Gill --- and ignoring the SC's direction to consider "all the issues which are raised before the Commission by the learned counsel for the parties" refused to allow the families of the victims to depose, relying only on the police to identify the dead, and narrowing the inquiry to the crematoria in Amritsar.[^92] This was an intimation of what the NHRC's chosen role would be in the coming years. In the Batla House encounter, it stood by as its own guidelines were flouted; and then finally prepared polite report giving the Special Cell a clean chit based on the statements of the senior police officers of the Delhi Police.

In 2012, when the Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial killings came calling on the NHRC he was informed that though the NHRC did receive "some complaints", the numbers did "not reflect a widespread practice or pattern in a country the size of India".[^93]

In its catalogue of deaths that resulted from encounters with police and security agencies, NHRC included "individuals with criminal backgrounds" in Uttar Pradesh, "Naxals" in the case of states affected by Naxalism" and "[I]n the Northeast, it is rare that someone completely innocent is killed by security forces."[^94] This then is the list of encounterables of the Indian state.

You could be forgiven for mistaking the NHRC's lament that "while NGOs make allegations, often exaggerated, about the death of civilians in police action, they seldom talk about the death of police personnel" for a Home Ministry affidavit.[^95] And why shouldn't you? The NHRC's rejection of the Optional Protocol of the ICCPR, requiring the creation of a body to hear individual complaints, was a barefaced reiteration of the official Indian position.[^96] Even more brazen was its certification of the draconian Armed Forces Special Powers Act (AFSPA) as a just law: "very rarely has the Commission found that the AFSPA is itself the problem; most times the problem is individual officers who have overstepped the limits of their power/authority."[^97]

The mind simply boggles to think that these are the views of a body not only created to safeguard the rights of ordinary citizens, but, in fact, to reassure them that their rights would be safeguarded.

As a link between the State and citizens, the NHRC has chosen to ally itself firmly with the state. To say that the lure of the sprawling offices in Lutyens' Delhi and the red beacon cars beckons the NHRC folks into the fold of the State may be crude. However, the number of retired bureaucrats, police officers and judges who crowd the Commission perpetuate the statist ideology and blunt the edge of its potentialities --- despite the limiting nature of the NHRC Act --- even when presented with a chance.

In practice, this procedure means that the number of encounter deaths that will be scrutinized diligently for excess will be miniscule.

There have no doubt been some convictions of police officers involved in killings; but those have been the result of relentless pursuit of justice by private citizens. It demands a tenacity that won't fissure and crumble under the collective weight of the System. And chances are even dimmer if those killed are labeled 'terrorists'. Staying the judgement of the AP High Court, the then Chief Justice of the Supreme Court --- now the chairperson of the NHRC --- said: "We can't fully endorse the judgement... If we have to accept what you say then all police officers involved in the Mumbai terror attack of November 26, 2008 should face criminal charges."


[^62]: _Ab Tak Chhappan_ 2004, Director: Shimit Amin; Producer: Ram Gopal Verma.

[^63]: "'Encounters' are Murders: Interim Report of the Civil Rights Committee", _Economic and Political Weekly_, Vol. 12, No.21, 21 May 1977, pp. 827-829.

[^64]: _Police Killings and Rural Violence in Andhra Pradesh_, _Human Rights Watch_, 1992, pp. 9-10.

[^65]: _Encounter Killings in Andhra Pradesh, Excerpts from Reports of AP Civil Liberties Committee_, Hyderabad, 1985. Available [http://www.unipune.ac.in/snc/cssh/Human%20Rights/02%20STATE%20AND%20ARMY%20-%20POLICE%20REPRESSION/A-%20Andhra%20pradesh/10.pdf](http://www.unipune.ac.in/snc/cssh/Human%20Rights/02%20STATE%20AND%20ARMY%20-%20POLICE%20REPRESSION/A-%20Andhra%20pradesh/10.pdf)

[^66]: Report of the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions, 1990, para 211, p. 54.

[^67]: [http://www.sikhsiyasat.net/2013/07/02/i-killed-83-innocentsikhs-in-staged-encounters-on-directions-of-high-ups-in-punjabpolice-surjit-singh-si/](http://www.sikhsiyasat.net/2013/07/02/i-killed-83-innocentsikhs-in-staged-encounters-on-directions-of-high-ups-in-punjabpolice-surjit-singh-si/)

[^68]: Human Rights Violations in Punjab: Use and Abuse of the Law, Amnesty International, May 1991. Available at: [http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ASA20/011/1991/ruld0c5a939-194411dd-92e7-c59f81373cf2/asa20011199lar.html](http://www.amnesty.org/en/library/asset/ASA20/011/1991/ruld0c5a939-194411dd-92e7-c59f81373cf2/asa20011199lar.html); See also _Dead Silence: The Legacy of Human Rights Abuses in Punjab_, _HRW and Physicians for Human Rights_, 1994, p. 13.

[^69]: Anil Nauriya, "Hiss of the Serpent", _Economic and Political Weekly_, Vol. 23, No. 24, 1988, pp. 1211-1214.

[^70]: _State Terrorism in Punjab. A Report_ by Committee for Information and Initiative on Punjab, New Delhi 1989.

[^71]: Para 335, Available at: [http://www.ensaaf.org/publications/other/Rapporteur_on_executions_1993.pdf](http://www.ensaaf.org/publications/other/Rapporteur_on_executions_1993.pdf)

[^72]: _Ibid._, para 340.

[^73]: _Ibid._, para 347.

[^74]: _PUCL vs the State of Maharashtra and Others_, Bombay High Court, Author A.P.Shah; Bench: AP Shah and J Patil, 10 December 1997. Available at [http://indiankanoon.org/doc/807655/](http://indiankanoon.org/doc/807655/)

[^75]: _The Aguiar Commission Report on the Extra Judicial Executions by the Bombay Police_, 15 July 1998, p. 20. Accessed at: [http://www.oocities.org/indianfascism/fascism/bombay1.htm](http://www.oocities.org/indianfascism/fascism/bombay1.htm)

[^76]: _PUCL vs the State of Maharashtra and Others_, Bombay High Court, Equivalent citations: 1999 (4) Bom CR 608; Author: N Arumugham Bench: N Arumugham, SR Desai.

[^77]: Full text of the Interrogation Report here: [http://www.investigativeproject.org/documents/case_docs/1602.pdf](http://www.investigativeproject.org/documents/case_docs/1602.pdf)

[^78]: "NIA note claimed Ishrat was with LeT" by Abhinandan Mishra, 22 June 2013, _Sunday Guardian_. Accessed at [http://www.sunday-guardian.com/news/nia-note-claimed-ishrat-was-with-let](http://www.sunday-guardian.com/news/nia-note-claimed-ishrat-was-with-let); "Leaked NIA document indicates Cover up in Ishrat Jahan Case" by Praveen Swami, 16 July 2013, Firstpost. Accessed at: [http://www.firstpost.com/india/leaked-nia-document-indicates-cover-up-in-ishrat-jahan-case-958401.html](http://www.firstpost.com/india/leaked-nia-document-indicates-cover-up-in-ishrat-jahan-case-958401.html)

[^79]: "Modi, Advani were in Ishrat Jahan's Hitlist", 14 June 2013, Centrestage, Headlines Today. Accessed at: [http://headlinestoday.intoday.in/programme/ishrat-jahan-fake-encounter-case-narendra-modi-lk-advani-david-headley/1/280007.html](http://headlinestoday.intoday.in/programme/ishrat-jahan-fake-encounter-case-narendra-modi-lk-advani-david-headley/1/280007.html)

[^80]: Communication received by the NHRC from the office of Deputy Secretary, Home, Cited in "NHRC Proceedings on the Batla House Encounter", 20 July 2009, pp. 11-12. Available at: [http://nhrc.nic.in/batla.htm](http://nhrc.nic.in/batla.htm).

[^81]: See _Beyond Reasonable Doubt? The Conviction of Shahzad Ahmed_, Jamia Teachers' Solidarity Association, August 2013. Available [http://im.rediff.com/news/2013/aug/01batla_verdict.pdf](http://im.rediff.com/news/2013/aug/01batla_verdict.pdf)

[^82]: _State vs Shahzad Ahmed @Pappu_ (SC No. 42/10); Order on sentencing passed on 30 July 2013. Copy on record.

[^83]: Writ Petition Nos.: 15419 of 2006; 26358 of 1999; 7906 of 2000; 14475 of 2002; 440 of 2003 and 857 of 2008.

[^84]: _Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee vs the Government of Andhra Pradesh_, In the High Court of Judicature of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad (Special Original Jurisdiction), 6 February 2009. Copy on record.

[^85]: In the High Court of Judicature of Andhra Pradesh at Hyderabad; WP No. 15419/2006, Counter affidavit filed by Swaranjit Sen, DGP, Andhra Pradesh, copy on record.

[^86]: In the Supreme Court of India, 18910-15 of 2009 with 5933 of 2009; In the Matter of _Govt. of Andhra Pradesh and others (Petitioners) vs Andhra Pradesh Civil Liberties Committee and Others_ [Respondents]; Counter affidavit filed by Union of India, Petitioner No. 2, copy on record.

[^87]: "Human Rights? Terrorists are animals, we need animal rights" by Tannu Sharma, 28 January 2009, _Indian Express_, [http://www.indianexpress.com/news/human-rights—terrorists-are-animals-we-need-animal-rights/416004/](http://www.indianexpress.com/news/human-rights—terrorists-are-animals-we-need-animal-rights/416004/)

[^88]: Just as the book was going to press, the Supreme Court in the matter of _PUCL & Anr vs State of Maharashtra_ (Criminal appeals no. 1256 & 1367 of 1999, WP (C) No 316 of 2008, Contempt petition (C) No. 47 of 2011) laid down the procedure to be followed in the event of an encounter killing. Widely anticipated by the civil society, it too fell short of unambigiously directing the filing of FIRs against policemen involved in encounter killings.

[^89]: Correspondence dated 22/05/2012. Copy on record.

[^90]: [http://www.deccanherald.com/content/390575/centre-asked-pay-doubtful-encounter.html](http://www.deccanherald.com/content/390575/centre-asked-pay-doubtful-encounter.html)

[^91]: I finally received a copy of the report in February 2014, many months after I had applied for it.

[^92]: _Protecting the Killers: A Policy of Impunity in Punjab_. 2007. _Human Rights Watch_. Available at: [http://www.hrw.org/reports/2007/india100775.htm](http://www.hrw.org/reports/2007/india100775.htm)

[^93]: Record of Discussion of the Interaction between NHRC, India and the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions held on 22 March 2012. Accessed at: [http://nhrc.nic.in/Documents/Reports/Record%20Note-%20UN%20Spl.Rapporteur%20on%20Extra-Judicial%20Powers.pdf](http://nhrc.nic.in/Documents/Reports/Record%20Note-%20UN%20Spl.Rapporteur%20on%20Extra-Judicial%20Powers.pdf)

[^94]: _Ibid._, p.8.

[^95]: _Ibid._, p.10.

[^96]: _Ibid._, p. 15.

[^97]: _Ibid._, p.11.
