## Temples of Justice

The footwear was lined neatly outside the courtroom. Twelve men and two women crowded inside barefoot, waiting tensely for the judge to pronounce the verdict. Had this court condemned them already --- forcing them to strip themselves off their chappals and sandals, as also a little bit of their dignity, each time they have had to enter this courtroom?

In mildly cold January of 2013, one of the most prominent trials in Madhya Pradesh has just wound down, after nearly five years. Crime number 256 was registered in the Kotwali police station of Khandwa in April 2006. Over the next two months, Khandwa police travelled around the country --- to the neighbouring district of Burhanpur, to Kota in Rajasthan, to Azamgarh in Uttar Pradesh, returning to Indore and Jabalpur, scooping up suspects till they had 14 accused to show for their efforts. They were all charged under the draconian Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (UAPA) for "furthering the activities of the banned organization, SIMI". To prove their case, the police produced disclosures of the accused admitting their guilt, divulging details of where a cache of unlawful literature could be seized, and implicating their alleged comrades in these crimes. Sacks full of literature supposedly provided material evidence.

In the course of the trial it was brought to the attention of the court that the police had sealed none of the recoveries, a procedural requirement. The prosecution witnesses were hardly independent. One of them, Deepak (PW 1), admitted in court to being a member of the Bajrang Dal; another key witness Bajrang Lad (PW 6) had been booked in a criminal case (Cr. No. 737/04 dated 20.11.2004) in the same Kotwali thana. A third witness, Akash (PW 5) in his chief examination told the court that he had signed seizure memos under pressure from the police, and that in fact he had never accompanied the police party to Burhanpur where the three Siddiqi brothers were arrested and large hauls of unlawful material allegedly recovered from them. Precisely a year later, in a midnight raid, Akash was picked up by an officer posted in the Kotwali police station, illegally detained and tortured. Some months later, Akash committed suicide.

The material recoveries --- unimpeachable evidence of the guilt of the accused --- interestingly had been produced in different cases in Madhya Pradesh, and even Maharashtra. A receipt for contribution of Rs 500 ostensibly made by the accused Asiya towards the building fund of SIMI was submitted as part of evidence in another SIMI trial in Bhopal, _State vs Sajid Ali and Another_ (FIR Number 302/2008), which ended in conviction. A banned orgnization would solicit funds for a building? And then record that transaction on a reciept? And the SIMI activist recording Asiya's contribution would enter her name as "Kumari" Asiya Khan?

Another alleged crucial piece of evidence against Asiya was a magazine called _Tehreek-e-Millat_ recovered from her possession. In order to prove that the incriminating magazine belonged to her, the police pointed to her name written in her own hand across the coverpage. Now, seizure lists in four different cases investigated by Maharashtra ATS show up a curious item: _Tehreek-e-Millat Asiya_. Each of these have 'Asiya' written in the same handwriting.[^154]

As we sat in the watery sunlight in the katcheri courtyard, half hopeful, half fearful of what was to come, even as bets were being wagered if the judgement would be pronounced that day or postponed --- it was indeed postponed --- the accused recalled the final arguments their lawyers had made. The infirmity of evidence, dubious seizures, doubtful witnesses, the fact that the magazines recovered were registered with Registrar of Newspapers of India (RNI), and never declared as 'unlawful' by any official notification, the inability of the prosecution to prove the handwriting of Asiya and Aquil Khilji on the contribution receipts; and so on it went, if only to confirm their own faith in the justness of the system that had so far offered them no deliverance.

"On what grounds could they be convicted under UAPA?" it was repeated like a refrain. And yet, convicted they were.

All but three were convicted under Sections 10 and 13 of the UAPA.[^155] They were held guilty of being members of an unlawful association and for committing an unlawful activity.

Stunningly, the court dismissed Akash's allegations of police pressure and chose to retain the initial part of his testimony where he had validated the prosecution story. His tragic story, reported widely in the local press, remained unobserved and uncommented by the court. The court did not find any credence in the defence argument that Bajrang Dal activist could be a motivated witness; neither did it feel that the witness who was booked in another crime in the same police station could be under the influence, or power, of the police.

In a baffling legal denouement, the court acquitted Asiya, Zafar, Khaleel and Shafeeque of the lighter charges of 153 A, 153 B and 295 A IPC, charges under which the burden of proof should be considerably lower than UAPA. None of the material allegedly recovered from these accused was found to "promote enmity between communities" or to make "assertions prejudicial to national integration", but the same material became the ground for their conviction for participation in unlawful activities.

Since 27 September 2001, when SIMI was declared a banned organization through a notification, Madhya Pradesh has seen an unrelenting registration of cases under UAPA throughout its major districts: 16 in Bhopal, of which 10 were booked between 27 September and 6 October 2001; 25 in Indore, of which 12 were booked in September--October 2001; 8 in Jabalpur, and a smattering of cases in Neemuch, Seoni, Guna, Khandwa, Dhar, Burhanpur and other places.[^156]

Reading the FIRs filed in the early days of the ban, one may assume that former members and office bearers of the organization were overcome by a sudden death wish. While their offices were being raided and sealed, and police and agencies conducting a 'crackdown' nationwide, SIMI activists and sympathizers appeared in public places, shouting slogans, waving pamphlets, pasting posters, exhorting others to join the newly banned organization, vowing to resist the ban on SIMI, and "provocating" --- to use the MP police's favourite term --- the Muslims against the government. And invariably, they were all apprehended in the middle of their unlawful activities and a rich haul of material seized from them. Never mind that these recoveries consisted of issues of SIMI's erstwhile mouthpiece, _Islamic Movement_,[^157] copies of which surely would be in the possession of SIMI members on the evening of the declaration of the ban; posters inviting people to conferences long past; or simply literature in Urdu or Arabic. Somehow though this material could not be recovered from crowds listening to these unlawful orators, nor could anyone else be apprehended.

There is little to distinguish the FIRs filed in 2001 from the more recent ones, except that it appears that supplies of 'SIMI literature' have begun to wane, and we now see photocopies of _Islamic Movement_, SIMI receipts and other magazines beginning to make their appearance. FIR No. 184/2008 PS Khajrana for example tried to pass of photocopies of front and last page of an old copy of _Islamic Movement_ as pamphlets.

Once booked in a crime under UAPA, every accused is fair game for further registration of crimes. This is the method of the malicious madness that UAPA unleashes: a set of accused, booked in various permutations and combinations with identical crimes, similar situations --- all recorded as if on boilerplate.

It is rare to find someone booked only in one case; 'case partners' abound everywhere. Imran Ansari, former state president of SIMI, acquitted in the _Khandwa case_, has spent over five years in prison in various jails, three of those in solitary confinement in Sagar. Just days before the ban on SIMI was declared, Imran travelled to Kanpur to help organize a SIMI conference. He was arrested and booked under Section 153. His five case partners were all local Kanpur boys. In December, in faraway Surat --- while Imran was in jail --- over a hundred men met to discuss minorities' educational rights, and were arrested in a midnight swoop by the police, which also claimed to have seized 'unlawful material' such as SIMI receipts. Imran was made an accused and in fact declared an absconder in this misnamed 'SIMI Surat Conference Case'.

Bizarre, however, is the normal in terror cases. In 2006, Imran was also charged with holding a "secret meeting" where a conspiracy to disturb the communal harmony and to perform terrorist acts in Indore was hatched. This secret meeting was conducted while Imran was being ferried by the police from Khandwa to Indore to be produced in court in connection with one of his numerous trials. The police claim that a witness revealed that Imran conferred with the owner of Wadi Chicken Centre, where the police party had stopped for a meal. Several others against whom FIRs had been registered in UAPA cases in different thanas had also participated in the meeting.

There is a unique osmotic quality to these UAPA cases, where guilt travels from one to another swiftly. There are cases, for example, where Imran may not be the accused, but the route to other accused. When arrested by the Khandwa police in crime number 256, Imran's 'disclosure' led to Sarfaraz in Jabalpur, from whom the police claimed to have seized a mobile phone. This phone was said to have been provided by none other than Imran, the Madhya Pradesh chief of SIMI, to further the activities of the unlawful association. On the basis of this mobile phone --- which, as it turned out, was registered neither in the name of Imran, nor of Sarfaraz, but of one Ram Prasad from Ujjain --- Sarfaraz was pulled into the Khandwa case while a separate case (Crime No. 706/06, PS Gohalpur) was registered in Jabalpur. The same mobile phone with the same phone number was shown as seizure in two different cases in two different cities. Sarfaraz was tried twice for the same allegation of possessing a mobile phone used in perpetuating unlawful acts. For five years, he continued to petition the High Court seeking discharge in the Jabalpur case but received no relief. He was granted bail by the Jabalpur High Court only after he had spent one and a half years in Khandwa jail. In the Jabalpur case, he was finally convicted under Section 153 but acquitted of UAPA charges.

But there is something even graver. Sarfaraz was consistently denied bail by the trial court in Khandwa despite the fact that government sanction to prosecute him under UAPA had not been secured --- indeed it was not received even till the conclusion of the trial, a fact which resulted in his acquittal. His entire trial had been patently illegal --- as had been his incarceration.

As terror trials go, _State vs Aquil Khilji_ was unexceptional, both in the manner of investigation, prosecution and its conclusion. Often, convictions have been handed out on the basis of police witnesses and recoveries alone, disregarding the fact of rampant violation of procedural norms by the police, by overlooking the fact that incriminating literature predates the ban on the organization, by refusing to weigh evidence at each step, by ignoring the most obvious lack of sanction from the authorities, by turning a blind eye to the frivolity of prosecution case to allow framing of charges under such serious sections.

In _State vs Irfan_ (FIR No. 251/01, PS Gwaltoli, Indore), for example, the only two independent witnesses --- Chandar and Rajesh --- thoroughly denied the police story. An expert witness testified that the Urdu literature seized contained nothing against the State or society, and in fact only consisted of veneration of God. Lack of evidence though appeared hardly to be of any significance to the court, which convicted him under Section 10 of UAPA.

Then there is the famous _Pithampur case_ of Dhar (FIR No. 120/2008). It triggered a chain reaction across the state, leading to the registration of 18 UAPA cases within one month, and another four over next six months. The _modus operandi_ of registering false cases was revealed rather unwittingly by the IO of the Pithampur case, BPS Parihar in the SIMI Tribunal of 2010. He placed before the Tribunal copies of 18 identical letters, all dated 29 March 2008, written by Chanchal Shekhar, SP of Dhar to his colleagues in 18 districts of Madhya Pradesh, providing them a list of names and telephone numbers recovered from the 13 SIMI office bearers and members arrested in the _Pithampur case_. The letters urged the respective SPs to "examine the information pertaining to your district and send information about the said persons with SIMI and also take action against them at your level." Reference has been made to this letter in several of these 18 cases.[^158]

The _Pithampur case_ itself was based on recoveries of literature. The court turned down the argument put forth by the lawyer for two of the accused from whose farmhouse the offensive recoveries had allegedly been made, that that there was no evidence to prove their culpability in any unlawful activity. True, said the Court, nothing documentary has been placed before it to prove their guilt. "However, this does not have an adverse impact \[for the prosecution's case\] because it is not usually possible to find such proof; one cannot in fact expect or desire formal proof."

These are the temples of justice in Madhya Pradesh. Leave your footwear outside.


[^154]: "2 Years, 5 Cities, 6 cases --- and 'proof' everywhere is the same magazine" by Muzammil Jaleel, _Indian Express_, 1 October 2012. Among these cases were the Mumbai train blasts and the Malegaon blasts 2006.

[^155]: Imran Ansari, Amanullah and Sarfaraz were acquitted of all charges. _State of Madhya Pradesh vs Mohd. Aquil Khilji and Ohers_, SC number 180/2006. Copy on record.

[^156]: These cases have been now compiled in the report, _Guilt By Association: UAPA Cases from Madhya Pradesh_, Jamia Teachers' Solidarity Association, New Delhi, 2013.

[^157]: Its publication was suspended after the ban in September 2001. So, all copies of the magazine predate the ban and its possession cannot constitute a crime. That, however, has not deterred the police from listing it as incriminating material.

[^158]: Affidavit filed by BPS Parihar (PW 58) in UAPA Tribunal 2010. Copy on record.

\cleardoublepage
