## Truth is Stranger than Fiction

"Truth is stranger than fiction", wrote the division bench of the Gujarat High Court in 2010.[^159] The High Court had invoked Mark Twain to explain the two letters recovered in perfect, unsoiled condition from the bullet-perforated and blood-soaked bodies of two _fidayeens_. It then confirmed the convictions to the six men --- including life imprisonment and death sentences to three --- handed out by the POTA Special Court of Ahmedabad.

In September 2002, a deadly attack on the Akshardham temple in Gandhinagar left over 30 dead and scores injured. The NSG, requisitioned from Delhi, finally shot dead the two-armed raiders after hours long gun battle. A complaint was lodged the same day. For almost one year, the investigations meandered and changed hands from the local police, to the ATS, finally reaching the crime branch on the evening of 28 August 2003.

At 6.30 pm, GL Singhal assumed charge of the investigation. At 8 pm, he recorded the statement of the first prosecution witness (PW 50) on the information provided by DIG DG Vanzara. The following day, on 29 August, _accused numbers 1--5_ were arrested. Provisions of POTA, which had been absent in the original complaint and FIR were added on 30 August. On 31 August, the IGP Operations ATS Gujarat received a fax message from IGP Kashmir stating that one Chand Khan in their custody had confessed to his involvement in the Akshardham attack. Though Chand Khan's --- and the Jammu and Kashmir police's --- story contradicted the Gujarat ATS' in that he claimed to be working for Lashkar with no local support, a few days in ATS custody were enough to iron out all discrepencies and discordant notes.[^160]

It turned out that the Urdu handwriting on the letters recovered from the dead _fidayeens_ matched that of _accused number 4_. Moreover, the six accused readily agreed to make confessional statements detailing their roles in the conspiracy, first before the SP Sanjay Gadhvi (PW 78) and then before the chief judicial magistrate (PW 99). Meanwhile, an ambassador car was recovered from the _accused number 6_ from Jammu and Kashmir. This was the car allegedly used to ferry the _fidayeens_ from Kashmir to Ahmedabad via Bareilly.

All loose ends taken care of and neatly tied up. What was there not to believe in the prosecution story? The Special POTA Court passed its judgement convicting all six in July 2006. In June 2010, the High Court opined that the "the offence of criminal conspiracy of mass killing of Hindus in Gujarat; of promoting enmity between the two groups on ground of religion; of inviting support for a terrorist organization; of arranging and managing meeting/s to support a terrorist organization; of inviting another to provide money, of receiving money and of providing money for the purpose of terrorism; of use of prohibited arms and explosives; of terrorist act of mass killing without provocation; of attempt to murder and of abetment are established."

The real story of the Akshardham case is not in the malicious investigation, which is by now rather familiar. Even the cast is well known: GL Singhal, DG Vanzara and their cronies in ATS and Crime Branch. Reading judgements and chargesheets of terror cases induces a sense of ennui, like watching a series of mind numbing B-grade potboilers, where the plot, camera angles, dialogues, all resemble each other to the extent that they all segue into one mess, difficult to extricate one from another. For example, the fortuitous discovery of fragments of papers that point the investigators straight to the accused. In the _Red Fort attack case_ (2000) a paper slip bearing a telephone number was said to have fallen from the pocket of an escaping terrorist, nailing the main accused Md. Arif @ Ashfag. In the _Parliament attack case_ (2001), telephone numbers recovered from the dead terrorists led to Mohammad Afzal, Shaukat Husain Guru, Afsan Guru and SAR Geelani. Then there are hazy lines which join SOG (special operations group) in Kashmir to the investigative agencies in Delhi or Gujarat. Also characteristic is the efficiency of investigating agencies --- the ATS, or the _Special Cell_, or the Crime Branch --- that are able to crack cases, arrest accused, and wrap up confessions in no time.

The real story, however, lies in what happened in the courts and the judicial offices. On 16 May 2014, the Supreme Court in acquitting five of the six convicted men who had appealed against their conviction liberally used the terms "perverse", "injustice", "manifestly unreasonable", "a gross violation of fundamental rights and basic human rights" to refer to the previous judgements and its power to overturn those.[^161] So deeply troubled was the apex court by the business of the POTA Special Court and the High Court, which had heard this case that it also acquitted _accused number 1_, who had not even appealed before it. Calling what played out in the courts merely judicial abdication would be too polite. It was nothing short of absolute abnegation of judicial responsibility.

For the long list of crimes the six accused in the Akshardham attack were charged with, and the severe penalties imposed upon them, the evidence produced was shockingly sparse. The bulk of the evidence were the five confessions extracted from the accused (_accused number 5_ had refused to confess) under Section 32 of POTA.

Remember, POTA allowed the admission of confession made to a police officer --- otherwise inadmissible under the Indian Evidence Act --- as evidence to be used against the accused. Nonetheless, the Supreme Court laid down several safeguards to ensure that the confessions were free and voluntary.[^162] These included the issuance of letters of caution to the accused. Such letters of caution should precede the confession, and should in fact form one seamless document. The confessions in this case, recorded by DCP Sanjay Gadhvi, stand apart from the letters of caution he is said to have issued to the accused when they were produced before him by the Crime Branch for the recording of confession. Moreover, in his cross-examination, Gadhvi admitted that he had not bothered to examine the accused to reassure himself that accused had not been tortured or physically assaulted. Neither did he --- he said in the course of the cross-examination --- assure the accused persons that not making the confessional would not endanger them. The Supreme Court thought it fit to reproduce an extract from his intimation letter to demonstrate the casual manner in which 'procedure' was followed. Gadhvi's letter read:

>" ... your statement under section 32 of the POTA before the Superintendent of Police is to be taken. But you are not bound to make this statement or confession and the confession that you will make could be used against you as evidence. So it is informed to you that you give this statement willingly and free from any kind of pressure or threat or allurement."

To these men, who had been in the custody of the Crime Branch for a month, Gadhvi gave a mere 15 minutes to reflect over their decision to confess. But if one could try and understand Gadhvi's desire to side with his fellow police officers, who had brought the accused before him for the recording of confession --- how does one excuse the chief judicial magistrate, before whom the accused were presented to fulfill the requirement under 32(4) of POTA? This provision required the magistrate to test the voluntariness of the confession.

First, the rapidity with which the CJM enquired about the wellbeing of the accused, recorded the statement, read it back to the accused and signed it, could have given Singhal himself an inferiority complex. _Accused number 4_'s statement, for instance, which ran into 15 pages, was recorded, read out, and procedure followed in a flat 30 minutes. The CJM admitted during cross-examination that he had not made "inquiry with any police officers with regard to the said confessions. I had not asked the two accused produced before me as to whether they need any lawyer or not. I had not taken the said accused persons in my custody."

But what vitiated the safeguards entirely was the CJM's direction to return the accused to the custody of the crime branch rather than to judicial custody. Imagine this: a man in custody of the crime branch for a month; produced before a senior police officer who neither cares to check if force has been applied on him to confess, nor reassures him that he wouldn't be returned on remand to the crime branch, records his confessional statement; within 48 hours, the accused is produced before a magistrate, who repeats the callousness of the police officer before him. The man is returned to the investigating agency. Would this confession be deemed as fair, voluntary and hence admissible incriminating evidence against the accused?

Both the POTA Court and the Gujarat High Court found confessions recorded when the accused were under the absolute power of the crime branch to be admissible. Both agreed that the prosecution had proved that procedure had been followed. Both concurred, in contravention to settled principle, that Section 32 (5) of POTA did not compel the CJM recording the statement to send the accused to judicial custody --- not unless torture was expressly alleged. Both paid little heed to the disappearance of medical records of the accused, which could have proved the allegation of fracture resulting from torture. Both dismissed retractions of confessions, wherein the accused alleged brutal violence, which had forced them to confess, as mechanical and tutored.

Neither was exercised by the fact that the case unraveled with such great speed as soon as the crime branch took over the investigations. The precipitous speed of investigation was referred to by the HC indulgently as "gathering of momentum". Neither cared that DG Vanzara, whose role in pointing towards the PW 50 triggered the other arrests, was not listed as a witness, depriving the defence the right to cross-examine him. Neither saw that the state Home Ministry had granted the sanction for POTA swiftly with little regard to facts and without application of mind.

It did not trouble either the POTA Court or the High Court that there was in fact not a shred of evidence save for these dubious confessions that could link the accused to the crime. There were of course the letters, retrieved in pristine condition from the slain militants. That the handwriting expert who proved _Accused-4_'s handwriting on the recovered letters could not read or write Urdu, or even differentiate between Urdu, Persian or Arabic, was a trifle neither court could be bothered with. The only 'proof' offered for _hawala_ transactions, a diary with entries of cash under the code name 'Jihad', was accepted without a trace of irony. The ambassador car driven by _accused number 6_ had been seized from the compound of the SOG in Srinagar, and no papers existed to demonstrate that the car belonged to him --- or had indeed been recovered from him.

In the end, what one is left with, are the contradictory confessions, which both courts found adequate to sentence three men to death.

The application of POTA thus was crucial to the sustenance of the case.

The trial records of the _Akshardham case_ validate the fears expressed by civil liberties activists. PUCL had argued before the Supreme Court against allowing police officers to record confessions, cautioning that once the police had obtained confessions, the magistrates would only be used mechanically to put the seal of approval. It is evident here that safeguards remained a lifeless formality, hardly ever held up to any reasonable scrutiny.

The _Akshardham attack case_ mirrors the _Parliament attack case_ in more ways than one: from the manner of investigation, the weak evidence, to the rampant flouting of safeguards, to the arguments in court defending all this. 'Collective conscience' ultimately outweighed the respect for substantive procedure in the latter. Adam Ajmeri, _accused number 2_ in Akshardham, was saved Afzal Guru's fate by the Supreme Court. But can we offer that as consolation to a man who lost eleven years of his life?

The Supreme Court in writing the judgement in the present case is keenly conscious of the sordid history of this law.

>POTA was repealed in 2004. Yet, the trials, its implementation has entailed, are continuing till date. POTA was repealed for the gross violation of human rights it caused to the accused persons due to abuse of power by the police. This is an important aspect to be kept in mind while deciding this case and hence, it was pertinent to mention this in the beginning to say that we are wary of the abuse the provisions of this Act might bring.

POTA was repealed in 2004 when the last NDA government was ousted. In its place, the pre-existing Unlawful Activities Prevention Act was fortified. Though UAPA does not allow confessions as evidence, as much as a whisper of the word 'terrorism' can produce some wonders. The sessions court, convicting Arif in the _Red Fort attack case_ held that: "Even _if_ there is some torture or illegality committed by the police officials in the course of investigation, the same does not render the evidence inadmissible."[^163]

Terror cases are tried under UAPA for years without sanction being obtained; and when granted, sanction is often proved in court by way of a lowly clerk in the state home ministry testifying to his officer's signature on the sanction order. When the UAPA was being amended in the Parliament following the 2008 Mumbai attack, LK Advani had rued the absence of admissibility of confessions. Today, when his former protégé, who built his initial political career at least partly on the blusterous rhetoric of terrorism --- deploying Godhra, Akshardham, Haren Pandya murder and the numerous other POTA cases and encounter killings as strategic political resources --- is in power, prepare for a new counterterrorism regime.

As though to inaugurate it, GL Singhal, arrested in 2013 by the CBI for leading the Ishrat Jahan fake encounter, and protagonist of the _Akshardham attack case_, has been reinstated by the Gujarat government.


[^159]: _State vs Adambhai_, Criminal Confirmation Case Number 2 of 2006 with Cr Appeal Number 1675 of 2006 with Cr Appeal Number 1328 of 2006, Gujarat High Court, Judges: R.M. Doshit and K.M. Thaker, 1 June 2010.

[^160]: See _The State, Democracy and Anti-Terror Laws in India_ by Ujjwal Kumar Singh, Sage, Delhi, 2007, pp. 177--80.

[^161]: _Adambhai Sulemanbhai Ajmeri & Others vs State of Gujarat_, Criminal Appeals Numbers 2295--2296 of 2010 with Criminal Appeal Number 45 of 2011, Supreme Court of India, Judge: V. Gopala Gowda, 16 May 2014.

[^162]: Subsection 1 of Section 32 allowed for admission of a confession made before a police officer not lower in rank than a Superintendent of Police as evidence. Subsections 2--5 contained the do safeguards, namely that the person making the confession should be explained in writing that the confession can be used against him; the confession be recorded in an atmosphere free from threat or inducement; the maker of the confession should be produced before a Chief Judicial Magistrate within 48 hours; the CJM has to verify the voluntariness of the confession and the well being of the person making the confession.

[^163]: See _An Unfair Verdict: A Report on the Red Fort Attack_, Peoples' Union for Democratic Rights, Delhi, 2006.

\cleardoublepage
