## Appendix I

`Thirteen men, alleged to be members of SIMI, were charged with planning and executing the bomb blasts that ripped through the local trains in Mumbai on 11 July 2006. Their lawyer, the late Advocate Shahid Azmi, circulated this letter from his clients in 2008. It was titled, "Letter of condolence to the victims of the blasts from the victims of State terrorism".`

----

>July 11, 2006 remains an unforgotten day of horrific events in people's mind. Seven blasts in first class coaches of Mumbai's local trains moved the entire nation and global community. 187 innocents died and about 817 people were injured. Condemnation poured from all quarters. It was only due to utter lethargy of the inept administration and security agencies that a cowardice act of terror ripped apart many lives and left a deep wound in the hearts of many. The advent of 11th of July once again opens the wounds of the victims of terror. Had the administration and the security agencies done their work properly rising above all petty political issues, such a disaster would have been certainly prevented. This would have led to an atmosphere of peace and fearlessness. Alas, we can only pray for peace and tranquillity.
>
>You have been the victims of the conspiracies of the terrorists and we are the victims of a different kind of terror --- STATE TERRORISM. We are victimised for no fault of ours and have been forced to spend the best days of our youth behind bars. Your relatives are the victims of the blast, and we are the victims of the inquiry of the blasts. The souls of 187 people might be longing to see that their murderers are brought to book and punished. 817 people had been injured still the ATS has been turning a blind eye towards the actual culprits, have arrested innocent youth and put them behind bars with a sole aim of winning accolades of solving the case.
>
>We, thirteen --- innocent accused, are with you in this time of the grief and remembrance. We request you not to consider us as murderers, but victims who are suffering for a deed with which they have no connection at all. We are not a part of any conspiracy, nor are we associated in any way with Lashkar-e Tayyaba. We have not even seen any al-Qaeda manual, we are not bomb makers nor are we the planters. To be true we have not committed any crime nor have we given any confession.
>
>ATS has just played this game with the sole aim of silencing the public and the so called leaders and to diffuse the atmosphere of fear that had been created. Unfortunately, the perpetrators of the terror are still roaming free. The truth is that the ATS remained clueless (intentionally or unintentionally) and we were made the scapegoats so that they heave a sigh of relief. No doubt you are suffering for the loss of your near and dear ones, but we are suffering each moment for the last two years.
>
>We here behind bars and our family members outside are suffering daily running from pillar to post with a sole aim to prove our innocence. Innocent young men, professionals like Doctor, Teacher, Engineer, Software engineer, Call Centre Executive, etc are living along with criminals in jail. Though innocent, we have to listen to insults such as traitor, killer, terrorists by people who are known criminals and serving their jail terms for heinous crimes like rape, murder and dacoity. We face anger and hatred from other inmates and jail authorities. There are very few facilities given in jail and we are subjected to more harassment on the directions of ATS. The jail authorities too are prejudiced everywhere.
>
>For the last one year, the accused have faced torture at the hands of the ATS and now they are undergoing mental agony in jail. They have been divided into small groups and lodged in Arthur Road jail in different barracks; home to many hardcore criminals. ATS was pressurising each one to turn approver in the case, but the accused have remained steadfast and strongly believe that the truth will prevail. They are hopeful of understanding and support from the people who stand up for truth and justice.

\cleardoublepage
