## Appendix III

`A five-judge bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court, having deliberated on a clutch of writ petitions filed between 1999 and 2008, under article 226 of the Constitution of India, pertaining to encounter killings in the State pronounced its judgement on 6 February 2009. This bench framed four issues for consideration (see "Death by Encounter" for details on the four questions). The bench's judgement was a voluminous 50,000-word long, profound reading of substantive law, a meditation on Article 21 and a masterly survey of case law. Reproduced here is a section from the Court's observations in response to Issue number 1, namely, "Where a police officer causes the death of a person, acting or purporting to act in discharge of official duties or in self-defence as the case may be, is there commission of a cognizable offence (including in an appropriate case the offence of culpable homicide)".`

----

The Andhra Pradesh Police Officers' Association would urge that Section 154 (1) Cr.P.C., on text and principle accommodates a discretion in the recording officer, to consider whether a complaint conveying information as to the commission of a cognizable offence together with the factual narrative indicating a claim to one or more of the general exceptions (in Chapter-IV IPC) requires to be registered as FIR. In view of the provisions of Section 6 IPC the offences enumerated in the Code must be read subject to the provisions of Chapter-IV IPC and therefore contends Sri Uday Lalit (the learned senior counsel, for the 10th respondent[^250]), the recording officer acts within his inherent discretion under Section 154 (1) Cr.P.C. in declining to record the information and registering the FIR when the complaint conveys information that facially indicates commission of a cognizable offence but taken together with the general exceptions in Chapter-IV IPC (since the information also claims the benefit of one or more of these exceptions), the information does not convey facts disclosing commission of a cognizable offence and hence does not warrant registering the FIR. It is further contended that to interpret the provisions in Section 154 (1) Cr.P.C. otherwise would lead to disastrous consequences. The elaboration in this regard is that wherever a complaint is made, for instance as to deprivation of life or liberty by judicial authority or pursuant to a judgment or order of a Court; by a child under seven (7) years of age or by a child above seven (7) and under twelve (12) but of immature understanding; by a person of unsound mind; or by a medical authority, it would be obligatory for the recording officer to register a FIR and set the investigatorial process into motion. Such a result would destabilize equilibrium and would be productive of immense and avoidable public mischief, is the contention.

In our considered view these apprehensions are misplaced. Sections 77 and 78 IPC carve out a general exception from culpability in favour of judicial authority or acts done pursuant to a judgment or an order of a Court. Where the information conveyed is that the conduct complained of is by a judicial authority or pursuant to a judgment or an order of the Court, the information is inherently not as to the commission of any offence (in view of Sec. 6 r/w Sec. 77 & 78 IPC); further convictions and sentences are by the Court, the officer performing the functions of office. Where however the information is to the effect that a person masquerading as judge or not acting in such capacity had committed a cognizable offence, then and in such circumstance the recording officer must record the information and register the same as a First Information Report. We perceive no serious or grave public mischief ensuing as a consequence of interpreting Section 154 (1) Cr.P.C. on its normal textual terms.

It requires to be noticed that Article 261 of the Constitution enjoins that Full faith and credit shall be given throughout the territory of India to public acts, records and judicial proceedings of the Union and of every State. The appointment of a judge is a public act and the particulars and designation of appointment as a judge are matters of public record. Even if a mischievous complaint is made that a named individual masquerading as a judge had passed an order; whether the named individual is a judge is an easily discoverable public act and a matter of public record. Even the provisions of Section 81 of the Evidence Act enjoin that a Court shall presume the genuineness of any official gazette or government gazette. Judicial appointments of every hue and hierarchy through out the territory of India are gazetted appointments.

For reasons alike, as discussed in the preceding paragraphs, complaints against persons entitled to incompetence defenses such as infants (Sections 82 and 83 IPC) or against medical authority (Sections 88,89 and 92 IPC) may either require to be recorded and registered as FIR or not, depending upon the idiosyncratic facts, context and circumstances of the information. In any event, the failure to record the information or register the FIR wherever warranted by law, is productive of far greater public mischief than the inconvenience occasioned by recording and registering the FIR.

It must also be recognized that the exceptions in favour of judicial authority or the immunity vouchsafed to acts done pursuant to an order or judgment of a Court comprise public policy class of defenses. The language of Sections 77 and 78 IPC shows that the exculpation is absolute and not hedged in by limitations as in the case of private/self-defense justifications. As we have earlier herein considered on analyses of the textual, juridical and precendential exposition of defense justifications, private defense is a right available as only a preventive and not a retributive measure and proportionality of the defensive force employed to an initial aggression, is an integral component that defines the contours of justifiable claims to a defensive force justification. The general exceptions enumerated in favour of judicial authority or in respect of acts done pursuant to a judgment or order of the Court are thus qualitatively dissimilar and provide an absolute exculpation. We perceive no substance in this contention except sophistry.

Empirical analysis, textual and curial authority with respect to self defense justifications considered supra indicates that the need of self-preservation is rooted in the doctrine of necessity. It is the rule of necessity to which a party may have a recourse under certain situations to prevent greater personal injury or injury to others which he may apprehend. Self-preservation is more an instinctive than a cognitive condition of a majority of the living species and in particular human beings. This instinct is recognized a lawful defense in the laws of civilized Nations and finds legislative expression in Sections 96 to 106 IPC. These statutory provisions _per se_ and as expounded in decisions are clearly to the effect that the Exceptions are hedged in and circumscribed by conditions and limitations including the imminence and gravity (standard) of the threat and conditions as to the requirement of proportionality of the response/defense.

The basic elements of self-defense by employment of deadly/lethal force include

(1) the perpetrator must have reasonable grounds to believe that he was in imminent danger of death or serious body harm; heated words, vague threats or the possibility of future harm does not suffice; the harm must be serious and imminent;

(2) the perpetrator actually believed that he or any other person was in such imminent danger; establishing this subjective belief may normally require the perpetrator to make a statement or testify as the case may be;

(3) the danger was such that the perpetrator could only save himself by employment of deadly force;

(4) the perpetrator had employed no more force than was necessary in all the circumstances of the case; and

(5) the perpetrator was not the initial aggressor.

Self-defense justification is normally an all or nothing strategy. In order to establish it, the perpetrator has to admit being at the scene of offence with a weapon, which he used intentionally to harm the aggressor. He has to admit that he injured/killed the aggressor. The facts gathered must establish and in a given situation the perpetrator may have to establish that a reasonable person in his place would have acted similarly. Self-defense justifications normally imply a rational response to a very dangerous situation, and normally eschew claims of mental illness, insanity, defenses based on intoxication or drug use, or other defenses enumerated as General exceptions to criminality.

### Conclusion on Issue No.1

On a careful consideration of the relevant statutory provisions; the binding and persuasive precedents; the normative architecture of private defense justifications generally and in the context of the provisions of the IPC; and the constitutional values that inform and structure our governance processes, we hold that the information conveyed to the officer in charge of a Police Station intimating the death of any person as a consequence of firing by law enforcement officials of the State (notwithstanding a claim as to the death occurring while exercising the right of private defence) must invariably and without exception be registered as FIR u/Sec. 154(1) Cr.P.C., and investigation u/Sections 156/157 must follow.

Sri Kannabiran, the learned senior counsel (for the 9th respondent in W.P.No. 15419 of 2006[^251]) cited the Privy Council decision in _Palmer v. The Queen and the House of Lords_' decision in _R. v. Clegg_ to support the contention that if the plea of self-defense fails in a case resulting in death in an encounter between civilians and police, the conviction for murder under Section 302 IPC must necessarily follow. We refrain from pronouncing on this aspect of the matter as this aspect does not fall for consideration before this Bench _per se_ or as integral to any of the issues formulated for our consideration.

The question whether on the failure of a plea of self-defense, in cases of death resulting from a police encounter, the accused police officer(s) must invariably be convicted for murder or may be convicted for culpable homicide not amounting to murder, is an aspect that is more appropriately determined by the appropriate Court of Session when trying the charge.


[^250]: M/s Andhra Pradesh Police Officers Association represented by its General Secretary Mr. KV Ram Narasimha Reddy, office at Lakdikapool, Hyderabad.

[^251]: Peoples Union for Civil Liberties

\cleardoublepage
