_The Chhattisgarh government handed over a stretch of the
Sheonath river to a private company to manage water distribution
without setting up independent regulatory authorities that could
establish guidelines under which a private firm could manage a
common resource. A long lease without a regulatory mechanism
can lead to unforeseen circumstances._

\ 

Sheonath river flows through Borai
in Durg district, Chhattisgarh. This
case is about the handing over of a
stretch of the river near Borai to a private
firm for supplying water to the region lying
between two district headquarters --- Durg
and Rajnandgaon. Borai is a newly developed
industrial hub, promoted by the
Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development
Corporation (CSIDC). It is 45 km from the
Raipur airport; on the National Highway
six and the main Mumbai--Howrah railway
line. The region is rich in natural minerals
and at a reasonable distance from Bhilai
(10 km); surplus power is available at a
reasonable cost. Surrounding the Borai
region is a cluster of villages that have
traditionally used the river water for irrigation
and fishing.

# Whose River Is It Anyway?

Sheonath river, a semi-perennial tributary
of the Mahanadi has been contracted
to Radius Water, a division of Kailash
Engineering, for a period of 22 years.
Radius Water is based in Rajnandgaon
near Borai and has been managing the
water distribution from the river. The
Build--Own--Operate--Transfer (BOOT)
project was commissioned in 2001 by the
Chhattisgarh government. Actually, the
Madhya Pradesh Industrial Development
Corporation initiated the project in 1998
before the birth of the new state. Under
the scheme, water from the river was
supplied to the industries in bulk as part
of an agreement with the CSIDC. Most of
the industries located here are water intensive
by nature --- distilleries, sponge iron
units and thermal power plants --- and
CSIDC is trying to make it the hub for all
water-based industries. Radius is not only
responsible for supplying water, but also
for operating a common effluent treatment
plant (CETP).

Radius Water built a 4m high dam
through a technique called the Flood
Regulating Barrier System along a 3.5km
stretch of the Sheonath river at a cost of
₹4 crore. The total cost for the project
is ₹9 crore for 30 million litres per day
(mld). At present, it has a supplying
capacity of 6 mld, but the CSIDC is
buying only 4 mld now due to lack of
demand though new industries are
coming up in the area and the scenario is
likely to change. The cost of water is
₹6.60 for 1,000 litres of water. For
CETP, the price has been fixed at ₹3.60/m^3^.
The project is feasible for 180 mld
capacity through an investment of
₹156.70 crore, excluding the cost of
CETP; CSIDC is the regulating authority
for the project. One of the clauses in the
agreement was that the villages downstream
would get water free of cost; the
clause also mentions that "under any circumstances,
the industry will be provided
30 mld of water". The water is stored in
the reservoir and has the capacity for a 180
mld supply.

The conflict did not start immediately.
Initially, the locals were not aware that a
private firm managed the new barrage that
had sprung up across the river. No prior
information was provided about this contract.
After a few months, however, Radius
Water informed the local fishermen that
they were no longer permitted to fish in
the 200m zone from the barrage (on both
sides) for "safety reasons". There were a few
skirmishes and employees of Radius Water
allegedly destroyed some of the fishermen's
nets. The latter complained that their
catch had dwindled after the construction
of the barrage. Farmers who owned
land near the river were also barred from
lifting water from the river with motor
pumps. This ban had the endorsement of
the district administration, which also
banned the installation of tubewells.
CSIDC enforced this rule within the Borai
industrial area too. People from downstream
villages started complaining that
the groundwater table had plummeted.
Many villagers from Pipalcheda, one of
the surrounding hamlets, insisted that
the water level in their wells had plunged
since the construction of the barrage.
Other complaints had to do with the
company not adhering to the terms and
conditions of the contract. According to
the written agreement the project cost and
maintenance was the responsibility of
Radius Water. However, the construction
was not completed on time because the
company did not have sufficient funds.
A decision was taken to the effect that
of the total cost of ₹9 crore, ₹6.5 crore
would be loaned to the firm and the
remaining ₹2.5 crore would be in form
of equity.

Ironically this hush-hush business about
a private firm managing a stretch of the
river came into the limelight when the
media covered a publicity event organised
by Radius Water to showcase their project.
With the murmur of complaints rising,
many activists and members of the public
launched a campaign against the project
highlighting the fact that by handing
over the river to a private firm the state
government had privatised the river. When
the news spread across the country the
resultant media glare and activism forced
the state government to look afresh at the
deal. A huge rally took place on November 1,
2003 under the banner of the Sheonath
Nadi Mukti Andolan --- members of the
youth federation went to 50 villages to
conduct awareness campaigns. The pressured
government ultimately decided to
scrap the deal with Radius Water but
according to reports, despite the supposed
termination of the contract the private firm
continues to manage the barrage and supply
water to the industries. Since the water
was meant for bigger factories than the
current customers, the pressure on the river
has not been felt as yet --- HEG remains
the main consumer with a 1 mld demand
and the river has been flowing at its
normal pace. The government is also
moving slowly because they will have to
deal with a loss of revenue if the contract
order is altered.

# Questioning Privatisation

The protesters have been questioning
the very concept of the privatisation of the
river. They wonder how the industries
department signed a contract for a river
that legally falls in the purview of the
irrigation department. The conflict --- one
of profit to industry versus livelihoods
for the community --- is as old as time.
Activists and lawyers argue that the deal
violates the Madhya Pradesh Irrigation
Act of 1931 and the National Water
Policy, which prioritises agriculture over
industries. Natural resources cannot be
signed over to individuals without taking
all the stakeholders into confidence.

Radius Water on the other hand insists
that the upcoming industries at Borai
will boost the state's economy and that
they were merely ensuring that water
was supplied to them at a low price.
According to them the industrial water
tariff in Borai is the lowest in the country.
The comparative rates are: Mumbai
--- ₹50/m^3^, and in Nagpur, Boregaon and
Dewas --- ₹16/m^3^ as against ₹6.60/m^3^
in Borai. The company also argues that
the construction of the barrage has helped
the water table rise by 8m in upstream
villages, which is sure to help the farmers.
With the threat of cancellation of the
contract looming large, Radius Water has
been saying that they will withdraw if a
compensation of ₹400 crore is paid to
them since the agreement is valid for
another 20 years; they have been threatening
legal action.

# Where Do We Go from Here?

This is an interesting case that has actually
thrown open the debate about the
rights of communities versus the rising
demand from industry. Governments have
to ensure a balancing act that leaves both
sides satisfied. It will not be correct to
name Radius Water as perpetrators --- like
any private firm they seized on an opportunity
to make profit. The main agency
responsible for creating friction is the
government which went about the deal in
a cloak and dagger fashion. By not respecting
the National Water Policy and the
Irrigation Act, they violated laws and are
liable to be taken to court. The contract
was signed without setting up regulatory
independent authorities that could establish
guidelines under which a private firm
could manage a common resource. In this
case, the conflict cannot be resolved by
dialogue between stakeholders, or by
providing compensation to farmers and
fishermen; a long lease without a regulatory
mechanisms can lead to unforeseen
consequences. The contract will set a bad
precedence and has to be cancelled for
justice to prevail. The affected parties
should be properly compensated.

The conflict goes to show that perhaps
the country needs innovative guidelines if
it is to keep up with the growing demand
for water across all sectors. It highlights
the need for adequate guidelines and
regulatory mechanisms. A dialogue that
involves all parties has to be initiated to
resolve the larger problem and the media
could play a key role in bringing the
players together: the local people who
use the rivers, lakes and groundwater,
industry, and other experts, governments
and politicians. This can lead to a better
understanding of their requirements and
constraints; it will allow the government
to build a consensus and draw up a
proper framework for a just distribution
of water.
