_This article was originally written for the _Journal of the United Lawyers Association of India_ and is published here by agreement with that Journal. The article is concerned with a Supreme
Court of India decision on judicial appointments and the meaning to be given to the word
"consultation" in the Indian Constitution. The article compares the Indian decision with a decision
of the New Zealand Court of Appeal and the Western Samoa Court of Appeal. The article concludes
by suggesting that the judiciary has a part to play in helping to create constitutional conventions,
and not merely in expounding them._

\ 

The President of the United Lawyers
Association is a most persuasive
advocate, and as persistent as he is
persuasive. He is also a friend, from
a common connection with the
London-based organisation
Interights. So it is that I find myself
making a brief contribution to the
inaugural issue of the Association's
Journal, as well as sending best
wishes from afar for the success of
the Journal and the continued success
of the Association.

The decision in 1993 of the
Supreme Court of India in _Supreme
Court Advocates-on-Record
Association v. Union of India_
attracted the attention of jurists
throughout the world. It might be
thought presumptuous and intrusive
for an outsider from as distant a
country as New Zealand, with
regrettably little first-hand knowledge
of the great country of India or its
legal system, to offer any comments
on such a decision. At the outset the
limitations of my knowledge must be
fully confessed. But occasionally a
totally detached reaction may be not
without some marginal relevance. So,
for what if anything they may be
worth, here are the impressions left on
me by a reading of the judgments
delivered by or concurred in by the
nine members of this highly respected
Court.

The copy that I have is the report
in the 1993 (Supplement) Scale
published by the Supreme Court
Almanac. It was kindly sent by
another friend, one indeed of longer
standing in that respect than Soli
Sorabjee.

The Attorney-General for India,
Milon Banerji, and I were up at
Cambridge in the same College
(Clare) together, rather long ago: in
the early nineteen-fifties. It has been
a pleasure to renew our friendship
recently. In his letter accompanying
the judgments he not unnaturally
commended the "strong minority
view expressed by the next Chief
Justice of India, Justice Ahmadi, who
upheld my contentions". But Banerji
AG then went on to speculate. He said
"perhaps, the majority judgment may
have your approval".

The reason for that tentative view
may have been awareness that I am
a committed supporter of the rule of
law, with a particular interest in
constitutional and administrative law.
But possibly and unsurprisingly my
old friend is not closely familiar with
my judicial approach. In the event I
find myself on his side and that of
Ahmadi J. Their reasoning appeals to
me as irresistible. That is said without
any vestige of disrespect for the views
of the majority. One transcending
impression of the majority judgments
 --- no less applicable, though, to the
minority judgment --- is of their
dedication to judicial independence
as a key value in its own right and as
an essential ingredient of any
democratic polity. The Sovereign
Socialist Secular Democratic Republic
of India, to quote the words (as
augmented in 1976) of the Preamble
to the Constitution, is fortunate that
its judicial arm so strongly embraces
fundamental principles.

The central points in the _SCAORA_
case were very simple. Article 124(2)
of the Constitution provides, so far
as relevant ---

>\(2\) Every Judge of the Supreme
>Court shall be appointed by the
>President by warrant under his
>hand and seal after consultation
>with such of the Judges of the
>Supreme Court and of the High
>Courts in the States as the
>President may deem necessary for
>the purpose and shall hold office
>until he attains the age of sixty-five
>years.
>
>Provided that in the case of
>appointment of a Judge other than
>the Chief Justice, the Chief Justice
>of India shall always be consulted.

Article 217 provides, so far as
relevant:

>**217. Appointment and conditions
>of the office of a Judge of a High
>Court** --- (1) Every Judge of a High
>Court shall be appointed by the
>President by warrant under his
>hand and seal after consultation
>with the Chief Justice of India, the
>Governor of the State, and, in the
>case of appointment of a Judge
>other than the Chief Justice, the
>Chief Justice of the High Court

Article 222(1) provides:

>**222. Transfer of a Judge from one
>High Court to another** --- (1) The
>President may, after consultation
>with the Chief Justice of India,
>transfer a Judge from one High
>Court to any other High Court.

The issue was whether "consultation"
in those provisions means
"concurrence". In essence, it would
seem to have been a question no more
complicated than that; but its
starkness can be and was decently
disguised by more abstract
formulations, such as whether the
opinion of the Chief Justice of India
is entitled to primacy. More
symbolically, Solomon's throne and
the supporting lions referred to by
Bacon were among the figures of
speech deployed. In _S P Gupta v.
Union of India_ 1982 (2) SCR 85,
where Bhagwati J (as then was)
delivered the main judgment, a Court
of seven Judges had held by a
majority of 4 to 3 that the Chief
Justice's opinion did not enjoy
primacy, and by a majority of 6 to 1
that on a plain reading of Article
222(1) it could not be argued that the
consent of a Judge proposed to be
transferred is a sine qua non. On the
latter point Bhagwati J had adhered
to his view previously expressed
judicially that the requirement of
consent must be read into the Article
to protect the independence of the
judiciary.

In his judgment in the instant case,
Pandian J speaks of a "chorus of
protest" against the majority decision
in _Gupta_, saying also that its
reconsideration was necessitated by
"the opinion of some learned
outstanding Judges here and
elsewhere, eminent jurists and the
Law Commission". Hence, the
reference to a nine-Judge bench. To
a distant observer this is surprising;
and it is still more surprising to find
that the judgments after the
reconsideration extend to 169 closely-printed
pages. Punchhi J speaks of
the Indian Constitution as "perhaps
the longest in the world, a document
written profusely. There is no
miserliness employed in the use of
words". Similar remarks might be
made about the judgments, yet not
without adding that their richness
and breadth are patently redeeming
features. To Punchhi J's final
rhetorical question "Was it worth it?",
a possible answer is that nothing
which so massively underlines the
value of judicial independence can be
dismissed as a waste of time and
energy.

In any ordinary context, including
administrative law contexts, the
meaning of "consultation" is tolerably
clear. In the New Zealand Court of
Appeal we had to consider the word
in _Wellington International Airport
Ltd v. Air New Zealand_ \[1993\] 1
NZLR 671. The case concerned a
statutory duty of an airport company
to consult with airlines before fixing
charges for the use of the airport. We
were referred by counsel, just as the
Indian Supreme Court was referred,
to leading English authorities such as
_Port Louis Corporation v. Attorney-General of Mauritius_ \[1965\] AC 111,
and to the proposition in the Privy
Council judgment delivered by Lord
Morris of Borth-y-Gest that the
nature and object of consultation
must be related to the circumstances
which call for it. In a unanimous
judgment delivered by my colleague
McKay J, our Court said:

>We readily accept Mr Fardell's
>submission that one of the
>purposes of requiring consultation
>was to place some restraint on the
>airport company, which would be
>in a monopoly position as the only
>provider of airport facilities in
>Wellington. The airport charges
>had previously been fixed by
>statutory regulations, and we were
>told that they are similarly
>controlled in virtually all other
>countries. The obligation to
>consult can be seen as providing
>some protection to the airlines and
>to the public against an abuse of
>monopoly power. Other
>constraints are the fact that the
>airport company is dependent for
>by far the greater part of its
>revenues on the three major
>airlines, that it is a public utility
>whose charges are eventually
>passed on to the public, and the
>fact that if it were to act
>irresponsibly it would be open to
>the Government to impose price
>control under section 53 of the
>Commerce Act 1986.
>
>From this base, however, Mr
>Fardell went on to submit that the
>object and purpose of the
>consultation obligation could be
>stated as an opportunity to allow
>the airport users to negotiate a
>level of charges that ensured that
>the monopoly position which the
>airport company occupied was not
>being abused. He submitted that
>the context of the obligation could
>be stated as "an ongoing dialogue
>of such quality that it can readily
>be described as negotiation based
>upon information transparency
>which involves the airport
>company making available all
>information which it is necessary
>for the airport users reasonably to
>satisfy themselves that the airport
>company's position is not being
>abused".
>
>We do not think "consultation"
>can be equated with "negotiation".
>The word "negotiation" implies a
>process which has as its object
>arriving at agreement. There is no
>such requirement in the present
>case. The airport company is given
>the power to fix charges. Before
>doing so it must consult, and for
>consultation to be meaningful,
>there must be made available to the
>other party sufficient information
>to enable it to be adequately
>informed so as to be able to make
>intelligent and useful responses.
>The process is quite different from
>negotiation, however. One cannot
>expand the statutory requirement
>by replacing the word
>"consultation" with "negotiation"
>and then importing into the
>section the very different meaning
>of the latter word.

Up to a point the view expressed in
that passage harmonises with parts of
the judgments in the judicial
appointments case. For instance,
Pandian J there adopts statements in
earlier cases by other Indian Judges
on the lines that "consultation"
requires that all the material in the
possession of one who consults must
be unreservedly placed before the
consultee: he cannot keep facts up his
sleeve. I fully agree, and believe that
my colleagues would also agree.
Whether in fact adequately wide and
unreserved consultation takes place in
New Zealand before appointments to
high judicial office are made by the
Governor-General on Ministerial
advice is a different question. The
description of New Zealand practice
given in the judgment of Ahmadi J
is not one that I recognise. The
learned Judge does not name his
source.

Proposals are on foot for a more
structured form of consultation but
the New Zealand Government does
not appear to be attracted to the idea
of a Judicial Commission charged
with the function of recommending
appointments. We lag behind India in
the sense that there is no statutory
duty of consultation, let alone a
constitutional one, nor at present even
a convention that can be defined with
any precision. So the surprise with
which one reads the majority
judgments in the Supreme Court is
coupled with a degree of envy. It
should be added, however, that by
and large the ideal of judicial
independence has been respected in
New Zealand in the past, at least in
principle. There have been no
flagrantly political appointments.
Subtleties of political preference
between reasonably qualified
candidates can of course arise. And
pressures for judicial decisions in a
certain direction (in sentencing for
example) are probably increasing
through the conjoint effects of
political and media opportunism and
current notions of accountability. No
doubt the tendency is world-wide.

The striking point, though, is not
that India is ahead, but the
overwhelming extent of its lead.
"Consultation" has been held to mean
"concurrence" and the judicial
techniques employed in reaching that
result must deserve close scrutiny.
Perhaps it is sufficiently obvious that
in ordinary contexts the two words are
quite different in their senses. If so,
the issue becomes whether in the
context of a constitution, construed
as a living and developing instrument
and permeated by powerful ideas
such as the separation of powers, the
vital word may be perceived to bear
a special meaning.

The old inhibitions against looking
at reports of Parliamentary debates in
interpreting statutes have been
abandoned for some time in New
Zealand and Australia, and now in
the United Kingdom also since
_Pepper v. Hart_ \[1993\] AC 593. But
ordinarily resort to Hansard[^/1] is not
encouraged, for it is time-consuming
and often unproductive, and it can
add to the cost of litigation. Varying
reservations are expressed about when
it is permissible. Certainly very few
Judges, if any, would agree that it
could be permitted for the purpose of
rejecting an interpretation clearly
required by the terms of an Act
construed in the light of the apparent
statutory purpose. Similar
reservations do not apply, at any rate
with the same force, to references to
the proceedings of an assembly in the
evolution of a constitution. Again
they may be inconclusive, but to
disregard them would surely be
irresponsible. So it is that the
Supreme Court judgments, of both
the majority and the minority, draw
on the historic debates of the
Constituent Assembly.

[^/1]: Hansard is the traditional name of the transcripts of Parliamentary debates in Britain and many Commonwealth countries. It is named after Thomas Curson Hansard, a London printer and publisher, who was the first official printer to the Parliament at Westminster.

In that respect, but in that respect
only, the case is reminiscent of one in
which, with two other New Zealand
Judges, I sat in 1982 to constitute a
Court of Appeal in Western Samoa.
That South Pacific country's judicial
resources usually do not enable an
appellate Court to be composed of
resident Judges, and New Zealand
provides this form of help from time
to time. The case is _Attorney-General
of Western Samoa v. Saipai'ia
Olamalu_, reported in (1984) 14
Victoria University of Wellington Law
Review 275. When Western Samoa
attained independence after the
second world war, a condition laid
down by the United Nations was the
adoption of a written constitution
guaranteeing human rights. One
provision in the resultant
Constitution is that all persons are
equal before the law; there are other
anti-discrimination provisions.
Compare Articles 14 and 15 of the
Indian Constitution. Constitutional
instruments commonly deal with the
suffrage for parliamentary elections
as a distinct and separate subject, as
do Articles 325 and 326 of the Indian
Constitution with their provisions
respecting adult suffrage.

Significantly, the Western Samoa
Constitution made no provision for
universal suffrage but did provide for
separate rolls for territorial
constituencies and individual voters,
thus impliedly envisaging
continuance of the existing system
whereby the _matai_ or elected family
heads voted for local members and
the population of non-Samoan origin
voted on the roll for individuals. In
that context, applying the principles
of interpretation both generous and
sui generis stated by Lord Wilberforce
in his famous Privy Council
judgment in _Minister of Home
Affairs v. Fisher_ (1980) AC 318, the
Court held that equality before the
law was not intended to extend to
voting rights. Thereby we reversed the
decision of the (Australian) Chief
Justice. But I am happy to say that,
possibly to some extent in response to
a concluding hint in our judgment,
the Samoan legislature has now
introduced fully democratic suffrage.
The judiciary can influence change
without imposing it.

The reason why that case comes to
mind is that on examining the debates
in the Convention which adopted the
Western Samoa Constitution we
found that after a lengthy debate the
Convention had rejected an
amendment providing for universal
adult suffrage. To shut our eyes to
that rejection, to refuse to consider it
even as an aid to interpretation,
seemed to the Court artificial. It lent
strong support to the conclusion that
we were prepared to reach without it.

At this stage the comparison with
India breaks down. In the Indian
Constituent Assembly, amendments
were proposed specifically requiring
the _concurrence_ of the Chief Justice
of India for high judicial
appointments. They reflected the
recommendation of the Body of
Judges. But they were defeated.
Granted that the meaning of the
Constitution can evolve with time, it
is still not easy to see how in less than
half a century "consultation" as the
term presumably must have been
understood by the Constituent
Assembly has been transmuted into
"concurrence". Nor would it seem
easy to find in the majority
judgments convincing reasons for
circumventing the difficulty. One
must not overlook the use made by
Punchhi J of a recorded remark of Dr
BR Ambedkar in the final Assembly
debate:

>To allow the Chief Justice
practically a veto upon the
appointment of Judges is really to
transfer the authority to the Chief
Justice which we are not prepared
to vest in the President or the
Government of the day.

Whether those few words of political
argument, unelaborated upon by their
speaker, can bear the weight sought
to be attached to them forty years and
more on is a question upon which it
will be better for an outside observer
to refrain from an opinion.

But the debates in the Constituent
Assembly are of secondary
importance. In the end what must be
in the forefront are the terms of the
Constitution itself, interpreted in the
spirit recommended by Lord
Wilberforce to whose approach I have
often expressed judicial allegiance.
Here the judicial appointments case
calls for primary focus on the
judgment of J S Verma J, generally
concurred in as it was by the majority
Judges; although Punchhi J
vigorously --- and tellingly
--- dissented from the view that "the
Chief Justice of India" should be
taken to mean the latter after taking
into account the views of the two
seniormost Judges of the Supreme
Court. Another separate judgment
was that of Kuldip Singh J, who
agreed with the majority on primacy
and on consultation of the two most
senior Judges but held that the Chief
Justice of India should be appointed
on the basis of selection by merit and
that the seniority alone rule should
not apply.

It is then to the judgment of JS
Verma J that we should look for the
actual decision of the case. Its most
striking feature is the enunciation of
a set of 14 numbered conclusions.
They begin with stress on the need for
a participatory consultation process,
a concept with which few would
quarrel. Prominent among the other
conclusions are the rules that
_invariably_ appointments to the
Supreme Court must be initiated by
the Chief Justice of India,
appointments to a High Court must
be initiated by the Chief Justice of
that Court, and transfers of Judges
of High Courts must be initiated by
the Chief Justice of India. No
appointment of any Judge to the
Supreme Court or any High Court
can be made unless it is in conformity
with the opinion of the Chief Justice
of India. The latter rule is subject to
a limited exception "for stated strong
cogent reasons", but if these are not
accepted by the Chief Justice and his
consulted colleagues the
recommended appointment should be
made "as a healthy convention". That
is the only appearance of the word
"convention" in the concluding
summary. There are several such
references in the main part of the
judgment. It is not entirely clear how
far the judgment is merely proposing
conventional norms.

The judgment also speaks of very
limited judicial review and
justiciability; but the justiciability
envisaged extends to transfers without
the recommendations of the Chief
Justice of India, and also to reviews
of Judge strength. Moreover a
timetable for the performance of
functions is laid down, as is a
requirement to record consultations in
writing. To some extent at least,
therefore, the rules appear to be
propounded as more than
conventions. A further specific rule
propounded is that appointment to
the office of Chief Justice of India
should be of the seniormost Judge of
the Supreme Court considered fit to
hold the office. There the word
"should" is more suggestive of a
convention, but the same can hardly
be said of "The opinion of the Chief
Justice of India has not mere primacy,
but is determinative in the matter of
transfers of High Court Judges/Chief
Justices".

Analysis of the judgment brings
out, I think, five main reasons given
to justify the propounded rules:

1. Under the Government of India
Acts, high judicial appointments were
in the absolute discretion of the
Crown. By contrast the obligation of
consultation was imposed by the
Constituent Assembly to safeguard
judicial independence. The comment
is inevitable that this seems scarcely
to justify reading "consultation" as
"concurrence".
2. Usually the Chief Justice is best
suited to know the worth of a
prospective appointee. The same
comment has to be made.
3. In England by convention the Prime
Minister in advising the monarch on
certain high judicial appointments
departs from the advice of the Lord
Chancellor only in the most
exceptional case. The comment has to
be that the analogy would be helpful
in the evolution of an Indian
convention, but not in formulating a
legal rule.
4. Articles 121 and 211 of the
Constitution preclude discussions in
Parliament with respect to the
conduct of Judges, except upon
motions for removal; real
accountability lies with the Chief
Justices, who will have to bear the
brunt of the criticism of "the ever-vigilant
Bar". The apparent
implication is that the Indian Bar
would be prepared to criticise a Chief
Justice for an appointment for which
he had no responsibility.
5. The President is required by Article
74(1) to act in accordance with the
advice of the Council of Ministers,
but that advice must be given in
accordance with Articles 124(2) and
217(1) as construed by the Court. As
to this reason, if the Court's
construction is correct, so much
would presumably follow.

With the utmost respect, when the
foregoing reasons are placed
alongside the ordinary meaning of
"consultation" many lawyers and
many ordinary readers would
probably not see them as adequate to
change the meaning of that word to
"concurrence". In truth the task is
Herculean. Verma J quotes from
_Measure for Measure_ the well-known
adage that it is excellent to have a
giant's strength, but tyrannous to use
it like a giant. Shortly afterwards the
rather odious Isabella ("More than
our brother is our chastity") said
something equally well-known:

> ... but man, proud man,
>
>Drest in a little brief authority,
>
>Most ignorant of what he's most assur'd,
>
>His glassy essence, like an angry ape,
>
>Plays such fantastic tricks before high heaven
>
>As make the angels weep; who, with our spleens,
>
>Would all themselves laugh mortal.

Happily the Judges making up the
majority in the judicial appointments
case enjoyed in fact authority neither
little nor brief, but perhaps the rest
of the quotation could not so easily
be dismissed as inappropriate.

Yet I do not end on a note of
criticism. As held by the majority of
the Supreme Court of Canada in
_Reference re Amendment of the
Constitution of Canada_ (1981) 125
DLR (3d) 1, recognising and giving
precision to constitutional
conventions is a legitimate function
of the Courts. Despite the proffered
evidence that of 547 appointments to
the higher Indian judiciary in the
decade ending in 1993 only seven were
not in accord with the opinion of the
Chief Justice of India, it may be
assumed that some genuine
apprehension underlay the
deliberations of the Judges and the
arguments of counsel in _SCAORA v.
UOI_. The majority of the Court may
have gone too far, if their conclusions
be viewed as an interpretation of the
Constitution intended to be binding
in law. but the judicial arm of the
state has a part to play not merely in
expounding conventions, but in
helping to create them. The decision
of the majority will no doubt have at
least that tendency in India itself. And
the overall impact of their decision is
a blow struck for the principle of
judicial independence that will be felt
in India only. However vulnerable in
detail, it will surely always be seen as
a dramatic event in the international
history of jurisprudence.
