India's involvement with the World Bank (WB) dates back to its earliest days.
India was one of the 17 countries which met in Atlantic City, USA in June
1944 to prepare the agenda for the Bretton Woods conference, and one of
the 44 countries which signed the final Agreement that established the
Bank. In fact the name "International Bank for Reconstruction and Development"
(IBRD) was first suggested by India to the drafting committee. The
Indian delegation was led by Sir Jeremy Raisman, Finance member of the
Government of India and included Sir C D Deshmukh (Governor of the
Reserve Bank of India, later to become India's Finance Minister), Sir
Theodore Gregory (the first Economic Advisor to the Government of
India), Sir R K Shanmukhan Chetty (later independent India's first Finance
Minister), A D Shroff (one of the architects of the Bombay Plan) and BK
Madan (later India's Executive Director in the IMF).

The Bank lending to India started in 1949, when the first loan of $34 million
was approved for the Indian Railways. The first decade of the Bank's
lending to India (1949--1959) saw just about 20 loans for a total amount of $611
million. During the years 1960--69, overall lending to India from the Bank
rose to $1.8 billion, about three times the level in the previous decade.
Between 1970--79, there was a large increase in the absolute volume of International Development Association (IDA) lending and the IDA share in total Bank assistance reached a high of 80% in
this decade. However, in the 1980s, India's share in total IDA lending
declined to 25% and was updated by the more expensive WB lending. The
volume of the WB lending rose to $14.7 billion during 1980--89, almost 10
times the level of $1.5 billion in the previous decade.

# 50 Years: An Assessment

The aggregate of the Bank's lending in India in the last 45 years was
approximately $42 billion. India is the single largest borrower of WB and
IDA. India has claimed about 15% of total World Bank lending --- 9% of WB
and 28% of IDA commitments.

The 50 years (1944--94) of relationship between the Bank and India clearly
shows certain trends. In the early years of relationship, the Bank involvement
was not direct and visible as compared to 1980s and '90s. In the initial
years, the Bank closely collaborated with the more active USAID to force
policy changes. In fact, an unholy alliance of USAID, the Bank, the IMF
and Transnational Corporations (TNCs) worked hand in hand to pursue
economic changes. However, after the 80s, the Bank along with the IMF
has started a direct and visible role in India's policy making.

Nevertheless, there has been continuity in the basic philosophy and
ideology of the Bank over the past 50 years. The philosophy of diluting the
basis of economic planning, dismantling of public sector, encouragement to
private sector (both national and foreign), and greater emphasis to market
forces has been forcefully articulated by the Bank since 1950s. The Bank
has been proceeding in a methodical manner to force India to accept its
philosophy.

The Bank created conditions so that the Planning Commission was
relegated to the background in the late 1960s. During the oil shocks of 1973
and 1980, the Bank was able to push forward its ideology of market forces
with great impetus. By 1990, the entire economic environment was made
conducive for foreign capital to play a leading role in tapping the emerging
market of middle class consumers in India. And the foreign exchange crisis
of 1991 provided the opportunities to the Bank to clinch the objective
through the _structural adjustment_ programme. The past 50 years of Bank
operations in India clearly reveal that it has exploited the foreign exchange
crisis periods. So far, India has faced five major foreign exchange crises
(1957, 1966, 1973, 1980, 1991). In each crisis period, the Bank did not miss the
opportunity to force its ideology on the government of India. In the
following paras, we will understand in detail how this happened.

The Bank was influential in India's policymaking right from the early years
of independence. In 1949, the Bank sent its first Mission to survey the
potentialities of the Indian economy. Following this, Prime Minister Jawahar
Lal Nehru submitted a special policy statement on foreign capital to Parliament
on April 6, 1949. It remains the only document where the role and
place of foreign capital in India is stated in explicit terms. It also marked a
retreat from the Industrial Policy Statement of 1948. It included the following
principles:

* Existing foreign interests to be given "national treatment".
* New foreign capital would be encouraged. "Government would frame
policies to enable foreign capital investment on terms and conditions
that are mutually advantageous".
* Profits and remitances abroad to be allowed.
* Although majority ownership by Indians was preferred, "Government
will not object to foreign capital having control of concern for a limited
period, if it is found to be in the national interest".

The above liberal principles towards foreign capital were fully implemented
in the following year's (1949--50) budget. It provided depreciation allowances
and income tax exemption to a wide range of foreign companies. As a
follow-up, in 1949--50, the Government fully abolished Capital Gains Tax,
while the Business Profit Tax, Personal Income Tax and Super Tax were
reduced in the 1950--51 budget. All these concessions and commitments to
foreign capital were incorporated into the Industrial Development Regulation
Act, 1951.

Meanwhile, the World Bank began to intervene in Indian economic affairs
in a significant manner. A second World Bank mission visited India in the
mid-'50s. On the basis of its instructions to facilitate the close integration of
private with foreign capital, the Nehru Government established the
Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India (ICICI) in January 1955.

However, the Government announced the Industrial Policy in 1956. This
policy was a major departure from the industrial policy of 1948. While the
1948 statement had given private sector ten years to operate before being
nationalised, the 1956 policy marked out the areas in which private sector
could expand in an uninhibited manner.

Shortly thereafter, the Nehru government earnestly began to flout its own
industrial policy. For instance, of the 17 industries listed in Schedule A of the
Industrial Policy Resolution, "industries the future development of which
will be the exclusive responsibility of the state (and in which) all new units
will be set up only by the state", at least seven were opened to MNCs
through joint ventures. Schedule B industries which according to 1956
Industrial Policy, were to be progressively state-owned, 12 industries were
listed. Out of 12, the private sector set up units in 9 industries.

Although the private sector also benefited from changes in the official
policy, the real beneficiaries were foreign companies. Foreign private
capital flowed in larger volumes.

The form in which the World Bank wanted foreign capital to participate in
the Indian economy was made clear when the Government had sought the
Bank's assistance for financing the Rourkela Steel Plant in 1956. The Bank
insisted that the German collaborators supplying technology should have
more leverage than had been offered. The negotiations fell through and
evidence suggests that the reason for the Indian government to adopt a
strong position at that juncture was due to availability of adequate foreign
exchange.

# The Bank and 1957 Forex Crisis

Until the foreign exchange crisis of 1957, after the sterling balance accumulated
by the country in the post-Korean war boom had plummeted, there
was no conservation of foreign exchange. There was no foreign exchange
budgeting as the country embarked on the Second Five Year Plan.
Nevertheless, the heavy import requirements of the private sector and
government's liberal licencing policy resulted in a huge trade deficit.
Therefore, the government was forced to recognise the foreign exchange
shortage. The Government had to approach the IMF for stand-by
arrangement in February 1957 but even this was exhausted by June 1957.
Thereafter, the Government approached the United States and the Bank
for loans. In September 1957, Prime Minister Nehru said that India would
welcome a US loan of $500--600 million. He sent his finance minister, TT
Krishnamachari to the US to explore the prospects for such a loan.

Ten days later, a policy directive issued by the Director, USAID announced
that no economic aid would be available for the state-owned
industrial and mining enterprises except in rare cases.

The World Bank echoed American criticism that the Plan was "over-ambitious".
The Bank President Eugene Black addressed a letter to the
Indian finance minister urging the Indian planners to give more scope to
private enterprise and more incentives to foreign private investment.

Mr Eugene Black commented: "The Bank welcomes the arrangements that
have been made to associate foreign firms with the construction and
operation of a large number of major undertakings, both in the public and
private sectors, but hopes that more positive measures will be taken to
facilitate foreign investment and that consideration will be given to the
suggestions made by the Mission in its Memorandum".

Mr Black further cautioned the government in forceful words: "In making
my own comments, I should like first to emphasize once again that India's
interest lies in giving private enterprise, both Indian and foreign, every
encouragement to make its maximum contribution to the development of
economy particularly in the industrial field. While I recognise that the
Government of India itself must play an important role in India's economic
development, I have the distinct impression that the potentialities of private
enterprise are commonly under-estimated in India and that its operations
are subjected to unnecessary restrictions there". In response to this
criticism by the World Bank's President, the Government, sent a high-powered
team to USA. The team led by Finance Minister Krishnamachari,
and which included the RBI governor H V R Iyengar stated in New York:

>The socialism' contemplated in India does not, by any stretch of imagination
mean communism; it does not mean state capitalism ... It is a system under
which private competitive enterprise has and will continue to have a vital
role to play; it is a system which respects private property and provides for
the payment of compensation if such property is acquired by the State. I
submit there is nothing in the system which should be repugnant to the
social conscience of the USA.

The process of diluting the Industrial Policy Resolution continued
unabated. Violating the '51 percent rule' (the regulation that majority
ownership should be in Indian hands as far as possible) license was given to
Ceat Tyres of India Ltd, in 1958 on a 60:40 Italian--Indian basis. In the
meanwhile, as desired by the US MNCs, the Indo--US Convertibility
Agreement was signed on September 19, 1957, and the first of a series of tax
concessions to MNCs were made affecting salaries (May 1957) and super
tax (September 1957).

It is noteworthy that the Bank established its Resident Mission in Delhi to
monitor the latest developments in 1957. All these steps culminated in the
formation of Aid India Consortium (AIC) in 1958 with the World Bank as
Chairman.

Satisfied with these policy changes, the AIC provided the first large
injection of credit to India, more than $600 million from the US, West
Germany, Britain, Japan, the World Bank and the IMF. And thereafter, the
influence of western capital steadily increased.

As a consequence of this, the shares of several companies were sold to
MNCs in lieu of machinery, raw materials, patents, knowhow, etc., supplied
by them and made partners in several existing firms. In addition,
collaboration agreements both financial and technical proliferated. The total
number of foreign collaborations approved in 1948--58 was 550 (i.e., an
average of 50 collaborations per annum), it rose to 150 in 1959, 380 in 1960
and 403 in 1961. The MNCs were invited to take up the more profitable
state/reserved (based on 1956 Policy Resolution) industries, in heavy
electrical equipment, fertilisers, pharmaceuticals and rubber. In August
1958, the largest pharmaceutical firm in India --- the Hindustan Antibiotics
collaborated with Merck & Co. Inc. of the US.

By the end of the 1950s, foreign control in plantation and agro-industries
was near total. The most concentrated MNC interest was in the tea industry,
80% of the acreage under tea was foreign (British) controlled, the bulk of
this in North-East India. According to an estimate, 13 leading British firms
controlled three quarters of North-East Indian tea production. All processing
factories were foreign controlled as late as 1960. Two British firms,
Lipton (Unilever Concern) and Brooke Bond (Finlay) handled 85% of
retail distribution of tea within India and export trade remained very much a
British monopoly. In the 50s, one-third of the acreage under coffee and
three-fifth of the area under rubber was foreign controlled. Regarding
agricultural machinery, the entire field was a foreign preserve. Davidson of
India (Private Ltd), a subsidiary of a Belfast firm controlled tea machinery.
In 1960, it was envisaged to produce 10,000 tractors in the public sector. But
the task of producing 7000 was entrusted with Tractors and Farm Equipment
Ltd., Madras controlled by Massey-Fergusson. International Harvestor Co.
of Chicago and Danish controlled East Asiatic Co. (India) Private Ltd.,
controlled other agricultural machineries like tillers. Mining was controlled
by several MNCs like Andrew Yule, Macneill and Barry, Jardine
Henderson (Coal), British controlled Copper Corporation (Copper and
Krebs) and Pennoria of France (Lead), etc.

Total outstanding foreign investment in India more than doubled during
December 1956 (the first crisis) to March 1965 (the second), from $1.007
billion to $2.014 billion. As a result, the priorities set by the Second Plan
were systematically reoriented in favour of industries in which foreign
companies were willing to finance.

The Indian Government had become increasingly dependent on large
amounts of external assistance from the Aid India Consortium to finance its
import-surplus strategy. No bones were made about this in the formation of
the Third Five-Year Plan (1961--66) which was explicitly dependent on huge
inflow of fresh aid.

According to a report in the _Economic and Political Weekly_, January 7,
1961, the US Government made available its Development Fund to India in
the context of Government of India's announced intention to enlist the cooperation
of MNCs in the manufacture of fertilizers. In 1962, the Government
of India allowed the Ford Foundation to conduct a campaign for
bringing US MNCs and Indian businessmen together to establish fertilizer
plants in the private sector. Consequently, over one quarter of target
capacity was allocated to MNCs in the Third Plan.

At the request of the Nehru government, in 1960 the World Bank sent a
Mission composed of three bankers from US multinational banks. On the
basis of this Mission's report, under instructions of the World Bank, in
February 1961 the Government of India inaugurated the India Investment
Centre. It was an autonomous high-powered body with branches in World
capital markets such as New York, Dusseldorf, London and Tokyo to
advise collaboration ventures between MNCs and their junior Indian
partners.

# The Bank and 1966 Forex Crisis

Due to heavy dependence on external aid, imports and growing burden of
outward remittance of profits of foreign companies, the next foreign
exchange crisis occurred. This crisis coincided with the succession crisis
following Nehru's death. At this time, the World Bank became more critical
of the direction of Indian economic policy. A World Bank mission headed
by Bernard Bell visited India in 1964 and issued a report calling for the
devaluation of the rupee and abolition of many of the foreign trade controls
then in effect. It said "There is no particular evidence that the licensing
system has in fact served any positive economic purposes. It has, like the
import control system, protected the preserved inefficiency by, in effect,
allocating market shares and restraining the growth of more efficient
enterprises." India's first answer to Bell's recommendation was defiance. T
T Krishnamachari was again the Minister of Finance but this time he picked
up the gauntlet thrown by the Bank and insisted that devaluation was not the
answer. However, the Indo--Pakistan war in 1965 led to an abrupt suspension
of American aid to India. In early 1965, Nehru's successor, Lal
Bahadur Shastri died abruptly in Tashkent, USSR.

# The Bank and Devaluation

Mrs Indira Gandhi was chosen the new Prime Minister of India. The new
government immediately softened the hardline towards the Bank and its
western creditors. Mr Krishnamachari was removed from the Finance
Ministry for his opposition to the Bank's insistence on devaluation. The
Planning Minister, Ashok Mehta, with some socialist leanings, paradoxically,
became an active supporter of the Bank. The following year, the Prime
Minister, Planning Minister and the Finance Minister visited Washington.
When Mrs Gandhi went to Washington she was informed that resumption of
aid --- which was cut off as a result of war with Pakistan --- was dependent on
India coming to terms with the World Bank. The United States made the
Bank its intermediary and arbiter with respect to aid to both India and
Pakistan. From its past role as fundraising organiser and chairman of AIC,
the Bank moved into a more active role in evaluating Indian and Pakistani
economic plans and advocating, economic reforms _à la_ the United States.

The Bank's recommendations, echoing the Bell Mission report, were for a
devaluation of the rupee accompanied by the dismantling of a plethora of
import controls and export subsidies. The government announced devaluation
of the rupee by 37.5% (from Rs 4.75 to Rs 7.50 to a dollar) and associated
import liberalisation measures in June 1966. When the Finance Minister
was asked why the government had not waited another six months to see
whether a good monsoon might make devaluation unnecessary, he replied,
"If we had waited another six months, we could have had an absence of
imports in India". The implication was that aid was made conditional on the
devaluation. According to him "action could not be postponed because all
further aid negotiation hinged on it."

However, the devaluation package did not yield results. The expected
boost to export did not materialise, instead they declined. The reasons were
obvious. The previous structure of import tariffs and export subsidies had
amounted to a _de facto_ devaluation by raising the prices of imports and
lowering the prices of exports. A post-mortem of declining exports
confirmed suspicion that exports suffered due to abolition of subsidies and
gained little from devaluation.

Two days after the devaluation was announced, the World Bank called an
urgent meeting of the AIC in order to raise $900 million in non-project aid
which was promised. However, this failed, as the consortium members failed
to pledge the necessary amounts. Even five months after devaluation, India
had received only $465 million of the promised amount. The project and
non-project aid fell from $1.6 billion in 1966--67 to $0.64 billion in 1967--68 and
$0.76 billion in 1968--69, as against $1.7 billion per year promised by the
World Bank. This led to a sharp criticism of Government's policies by many
political groups in India. "You sold the country and have not even got the
price," a parliamentarian accused the government. Thus, the devaluation
became very unpopular in India. The unpopularity of the devaluation was
believed to be a reason of the defeat of the Congress Party in the 1967
general election. In response to public criticism and on aid disappointment,
Mrs Gandhi took a sharp swing to the left by abolishing privy purse and by
the nationalisation of the banking and insurance sectors. She also signed the
Indo--USSR treaty to show her displeasure with the western world.

Subsequently, she fought and won a battle for control of the Indian National
Congress in 1969 and opted for a hardline against the World Bank and US
pressures. The slogan of self-reliance, almost forgotten in the decade of
1956--66 had become a favourite phrase once again.

# The Post-1966 Period

India's dependence on the Bank and other creditors reached a high in 1966
when the Fourth Five Year Plan, supposed to begin in 1966, had to be
postponed for 3 years for obvious reasons. The plan was dependent on
uncertain external aid to allow the execution. As a result of this dependency,
the Bank sent a second Bell Mission in 1967. Its recommendations
were supportive of the Green Revolution which was already underway in
India. This strategy aimed at the creation of a stratum of prosperous
capitalist farmers and use of expensive commercial input such as chemical
fertilizers. The Bank exerted direct pressure during the 1966 exchange
crisis for obtaining favourable conditions for foreign investment in India's
fertilizer industry.

With the nationalisation of coal and oil industry in the 1970s, this option for
private foreign capital was foreclosed. But this move did not affect the area
of influence of foreign capital. In the post-independence period, foreign
companies were moving away from their traditional sectors of investment,
i.e., extractive and trading activities. The manufacturing sector gained
prominence during this period and adopted priorities set by developed
countries. Thus, foreign private capital was taken as inescapable by the
policymakers.

By now, it was evident that the increase of Bank loans was phenomenal by
any count ranging from 200% to over 2500%. This was more so in the case
of agriculture, irrigation and power where even the preceding period
showed a phenomenal increase.

In irrigation and agriculture, a closer look at the disaggregated project list
shows minimal Bank loans till 1960s, with the solitary exception of one IBRD
loan of $10 million in 1949 towards agricultural machinery.

It is evident that the post-1980 period of the Bank's loans and aid was one of
preparation for the grand and royal entry of foreign capital by building up
infrastructure --- power generation, mining and exploration of new reserves,
proper road and rail facilities, trained technical manpower, etc. In fact, the
Bank and the IMF inspired policies have facilitated a new phase of the
operation of foreign capital in India. This phase of economic liberalisation
began in 1980 with the SDR 5 billion loan from IMF. It weakened the real
economy, created the preconditions for export orientation and facilitated
the recomposition of the industrial sector in subordination to world capital.
This was followed up by another wave of liberalisation which included
devaluation, lifting of trade barriers and greater impetus to foreign capital
and market forces in India.
