# Abstract

_The consolidation of the Nehruvian state's sovereignty after Independence is
traced here as a contingent event which was tightly linked to the impact of
Gandhi's assassination and the mourning rituals which followed his death in 1948.
The Congress was able to use the funeral, mortuary rituals and distribution of
Gandhi's ashes to assert the power of the state and to stake the Congress Party's
right to sovereignty. This intersected with localized and religious expressions
of grief. Gandhi's death therefore acted as a bridge, spatially and temporally
linking the distant state with the Indian people and underscoring transitions to
Independence during the process of postcolonial transition from 1947--1950._

# Introduction

Despite ever-increasing attention to performance as a mode of politics
and the way that performance has shaped political possibilities in the
postcolonial era, Gandhi's death and assassination, and associated
mourning rituals, have been curiously neglected as sites of historical
research.[^/1] Gandhi was assassinated on 30 January, 1948 and his death
was followed by epic public outpourings of grief. A public funeral
in New Delhi was followed by a fortnight-long official mourning
period and then the immersion of his ashes in Allahabad. By any
standards, the public reaction was overwhelming and there was
widespread participation in these rituals by immense numbers of
people. The mourners on the river banks at Allahabad were estimated
as 'numbering more than a million'.[^/2] Indian nationalist historiography
placed a considerable amount of emphasis on the date of Gandhi's
death as the turning point in 'communal' relations after Partition. This
narrative conveys both the triumph of Congress over the adversities
of Partition and the triumph of 'secularism' over 'communalism'. It
was also an important way to make sense of Gandhi's assassination,
as he was a martyr to the cause of 'communal' peace, and the public
'returned to their senses' only through his death. Yet the main bulk of
posthumous scholarly attention to Gandhi's assassination focuses on
the legal case against Gandhi's assassin, the prosecution of the accused
and the Congress-directed suppression of the Rashtriya Swayamsevak
Sangh (RSS) and other associated religious nationalist movements in
the immediate aftermath of the killing.[^/3]

[^/1]: Versions of this paper have been presented at the School of Oriental and African
Studies, University of Edinburgh, University of Southampton and at the 'Everyday
State in South Asia' workshop in Leeds in September 2008; I am grateful for many
useful questions, comments and suggestions. On theatricality and ritual in the Indian
political arena, see Thomas Blom Hansen, _Wages of Violence. Naming and Identity in
Postcolonial Bombay_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001); Jim Masselos, _The
City in Action: Bombay Struggles for Power_ (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007); and
Srirupa Roy, _Beyond Belief: India and the Politics of Postcolonial Nationalism_ (Durham: Duke
University Press, 2007).

During the weeks following Gandhi's death the prohibition on
religious nationalist parties and the trial of his assassinator, Nathuram
Godse, were used by the Congress Party to secure political power
and leverage for the Congress _vis à vis_ rivals and challengers. Some
social complicity in Gandhi's assassination and the failure of those
around him to protect him were clear. The Kapur Commission of
Inquiry blamed a generalized apathy about protecting Gandhi. He
was someone for whom the police, for decades, under the tutelage
of the Raj, had become accustomed to perceiving as the enemy.[^/4] In
the first few hours, as the news of Gandhi's death spread, mixed with
grief, there was the fear that a Muslim may have been responsible, and
the awareness that, if so, there could be many more attacks although
the government went to great lengths to circulate information about
Godse's culpability quickly. But before the news was disseminated
that a Hindu extremist had been responsible, there were violent
attacks against Muslims in Lucknow and in Bombay.[^/5] One ICS[^ics] officer
remembered the terror that 'some lunatic Muslim' might have been
responsible, and the law and order authorities were on a state of
high alert.[^/6] Once the details emerged, incidents of inter-religious
violence subsided, becoming rare for several weeks and then reviving
on a reduced scale. On 4 February the RSS, Muslim National Guards
and the Khaksars were banned. Across India, perhaps 200,000 RSS
_swayamsevaks_ were detained,[^/7] and the state moved decisively against the
RSS. In Uttar Pradesh, for example, there were around 2,000 arrests.[^/8]
The Hindu Mahasabha was not banned and continued to operate in
'a shadowy area between what was acceptable in public life and what
was not'.[^/9] Both the RSS and Mahasabha had poor relationships with
each other, and were wracked with internal dissent and organisational
discord, as they attempted to reformulate their constitutions and
establish new agendas.[^/10] The reputation of the Mahasabha was also
damaged by the assassination. As the General Secretary admitted,

>The diabolical murder of the Mahatma Gandhi has for the time being
besmirched the fair name of the Hindu Mahasabha and I must confess
with pain that there is considerable panic and nervousness amongst the
responsible members and workers of the Hindu Sabha in the United
Provinces.[^/11]

[^/2]: _The Times_, 13 February, 1948. This figure was also used by the British High
Commissioner in Delhi.

[^/3]: Christophe Jaffrelot, 'Opposing Gandhi: Hindu Nationalism and Political
Violence' in D. Vidal, G. Tarabout, and E. Meyer, (eds), _Violence/Non-Violence. Some
Hindu Perspectives_ (Delhi: Manohar-CSH, 2003), pp. 299--324; David Hardiman,
_Gandhi in his Time and Ours_ (Delhi: Permanent Black, 2003), pp. 185--194; A. G.
Noorani, _Savarkar and Gandhi: The Godse Connection_ (Delhi: Leftword Books, 2002);
Claude Markovits, _The UnGandhian Gandhi: The Life and Afterlife of the Mahatma_
(London: Anthem Press, 2004); Ashis Nandy, 'Final Encounter: the Politics of the
Assassination of Gandhi' in _At the Edge of Psychology: Essays in Politics and Culture_ (Delhi:
Oxford University Press, 1980), pp. 70--99. Ashis Nandy's article locates Gandhi's
assassination in its social and psychological context, unravelling the complex layers
of interdependency between the assassin and the assassinated as mirror images of
one another. Nandy stresses the fact that Gandhi's thought threatened to subvert all
the foundations of Godse's own thinking, in his emphasis on de brahminsation, his
understandings of Hinduism, and his re-evaluation of femininity and sexuality.

[^/4]: Nandy, 'Final Encounter', p. 89.

[^/5]: Opinion of domestic political situation, (IOR) L/PJ/8/794, First half February, 1948.

[^ics]: Indian Civil Service, Civil service reporting to British colonial regime.

[^/6]: M. A. Quraishi, _Indian Administration Pre and Post Independence: Memoirs of an ICS_
(Delhi: BR Publishing, 1985), pp. 164--165. This moment of entangled anxiety and
relief is also depicted in Salman Rushdies's _Midnight's Children_ (London: Vintage,
1981), p. 142, when a packed cinema hall hears the news of Gandhi's death: '... and
finally the radio gave us the name. NathuRam Godse. "Thank God", Amina burst
out, "it's not a Muslim name!" And Aadam, upon whom the news of Gandhi's death
had placed a new burden of age: "This Godse is nothing to be grateful for!". Amina,
however, was full of the light-headedness of relief, she was rushing dizzily up the
long ladder of relief ... "why not, after all? By being Godse he has saved our lives!".
Gandhi's death was also widely mourned in Pakistan. If Gandhi had been killed by a
Muslim, the national and international outcomes could have been gravely different.
On the impact of Gandhi's assassinations among Muslims see, Gyanendra Pandey,
_Remembering Partition_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001), p. 145.

[^/7]: Walter Andersen and Shridhard Damle, _The Brotherhood in Saffron: the RSS and the
Hindu Revivalism_ (Boulder: Westview Press, 1987), pp. 51--52.

[^/8]: B. R. Nanda (ed.), _Selected Works of Govind Ballabh Pant_ (Delhi: Oxford University
Press, 1993) Vol. 12, p. 44. Pant at a press conference, 15 December, 1948.

[^/9]: Bruce Graham, _Hindu Nationalism and Indian Politics: the origins and development of the
Bharatiya Jana Sangh_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 12.

The crackdown against the RSS could be used to exclude factional
rivals within the Congress. There were many ways in which ideological
binaries between secularism and communalism became blurred in
local politics and remained far from clear-cut.[^/12] However, for the
purposes of this paper, it can be stressed that this was a major
consolidation of power following Gandhi's death, both at a mundane
and a symbolic level: through the selective use of the state apparatus,
and the strengthening of Nehru's prime ministerial authority; the
trial of Godse and his co-conspirators staged in the Red Fort;
sanctions against the complicit rajas of Alwar and Bharatpur; the
arrest and imprisonment of many Congress 'opponents;' and a prosecular
propaganda and educational drive. This guaranteed the
ascendancy of secularism and democracy as the legitimate ideological
foundation of the Indian state and its constitutional and legal status,
notwithstanding grave failures in implementation. As Gyanendra
Pandey has suggestively noted,

it is an improbable story of how a certain kind of bodily sacrifice in the
public sphere --- and a refusal by one outstanding leader to give his consent
to the particular conception of the political community that was emerging ---
changed the nature of sociality at the local level.[^/13]

The mundane consolidation of this power was made explicit in the
aftermath of Gandhi's death, for example, the draft constitution of
the Indian Union and the first annual budget of free India were both
published in early March 1948, only six weeks after Gandhi's ashes
had been scattered.

[^/10]: On the inner struggles of these organisations, see Andersen and Damle,
_Brotherhood in Saffron_, Graham, _Hindu Nationalism_, Chapter 2, and Cristophe Jaffrelot,
_The Hindu Nationalist Movement and Indian Politics_, Chapter 2.

[^/11]: All India Hindu Mahasabha papers, M-19 (1948), Statement of Bishan Chandra
Seth, 1948.

[^/12]: William Gould, _Hindu Nationalism and the Language of Politics in Late Colonial
India_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004); Ayesha Jalal, _Self and
Sovereignty: Individual and Community in South Asian Islam since 1950_ (London: Routledge,
2000).

[^/13]: Pandey, _Remembering Partition_, p. 145.

Yet, there has been little attention paid to the funeral and mourning
_rituals_ themselves as _political_ events, widely shared and experienced by
recently-emancipated postcolonial Indians, new citizens of the Indian
nation state. The historical record has intuitively recorded Gandhi's
death as 'a turning point' but has assumed this as _a priori_ and due to the
'natural' shock of his death. This change in mood cannot be assumed
as natural, though, given the severe and ongoing consequences of
Partition and Gandhi's own unpopularity at the time. Assassinations
are random and contingent events, but also unfold 'in the terms of a
particular cultural field, from which the actors draw meaning'.[^/14]

Assassinations are not necessarily integrative, and death rituals
do not necessarily bring people together in a Durkheimian sense.[^/15]
Indira Gandhi's assassination in 1984 was followed by grave violence
against Sikhs and violence against Muslims and RSS members followed
Gandhi's own death in the hours after his killing. State funerals of
renowned individuals are, by their very nature rooted in the final
rites of a person's life and their deep emotional resonance present
opportunities that assist political actors to transcend social cleavages.
Funerals may act to assimilate and to cohere disparate social groups.
The respect due to the dead places a taboo on dissent and may
lead, whether in Republican France or nineteenth-century America,
to exceptional political solidarity and temporary exemption from the
mundane, the partisan and the divisive.[^/16] But this outcome cannot
be taken for granted and politics may be shaped by the process of
mourning itself.[^/17] In the Indian sub-continent the political usage of
tombs and death anniversaries has a particularly rich and complex
pre-colonial history and in the twentieth century this has been well-utilized
and adapted for political purposes by the Congress Party,
whose own leading dynasty has been peculiarly afflicted by a series
of unfortunate deaths and assassinations.[^/18] Indeed, the centrality of
death to Indian life and religious thought, the importance of violent
deaths in particular and their appropriation by both Brahmanical
Hinduism and folk cults, suggests that Gandhi's death was a political
event with the capacity for deep social transformation.[^/19]

[^/14]: Marshall Sahlins, _Apologies to Thucydides: Understanding History as Culture and Vice
Versa_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007), p. 291.

[^/15]: Emile Durkheim, _The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life_ (Originally published
in 1912, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001).

[^/16]: Avner Ben-Amos, _Funerals, Politics and Memory in Modern France, 1789--1996_
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000); Barry Schwartz, 'Mourning and the Making
of a Sacred Symbol: Durkheim and the Lincoln Assassination' _Social Forces_, Vol. 70,
No. 2 (December 1991).

[^/17]: 'Mourning may be used', write Rebecca Saunders and Kamran Aghaie 'for
hegemonic or counter hegemonic, oppressive or emancipatory, purposes; processes
of mourning contain a formidable cache of loose power, ideologically useful affect,
and empty signifiers that numerous entities --- religious, political, social, economic ---
have not failed to put to use'. Rebecca Saunders and Kamran Aghaie, 'Introduction:
Mourning and Memory' _Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle East_, Vol. 25 No. 1 (2005), p. 22. _See also_, Michael C. Kearl, _Endings: A Sociology of Death and
Dying_ (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1989); Liz Wilson (ed.), _The Living and the
Dead: Social dimensions of death in South Asian religions_ (New York: State University of
New York Press, 2003); and Peter Metcalf and Richard Huntington, _Celebrations of
Death: The Anthropology of Mortuary Ritual_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1991).

This paper does not seek to challenge the intuitive and empirical
evidence which emphatically shows that 30 January, 1948 _was_ a critical
turning point. Rather than revise this historical orthodoxy, this paper
will argue that it was not only the _fact_ of Gandhi's death itself but
through the _performance_ of the attendant rituals, ceremonies and the
public and private manifestations of grief that Indian state sovereignty
was consolidated and extended.

Here, the term 'sovereignty' is used to signal a concern with how
a postcolonial state, to some extent exogenously created by external
intervention, expands and consolidates its imagined, figurative and
metaphorical power in the political sphere after the moment of
independence. The maintenance of sovereign power preoccupies all
states but raises particular issues in the context of decolonization.
In postcolonial states patrimonial, community and religious centres
of power have vied for omnipotence with the sovereign power
of the nation state in overlapping and intersecting ways.[^/20] The
postcolonial state expands and attempts the displacement of
'lower-order legitimacies' but is ever only partially able to do so.[^/21]
In India, where state sovereignty has exuded a powerful imaginary in
many places, there has been a project of retrospectively naturalising
the appearance of state-sovereignty fit. Naturalising sovereign power
is always an ongoing enterprise. There is a particular irony here as
Gandhi himself was an advocate of alternative forms of sovereignty
and an important critic of the Westphalian nation state. Yet, Gandhi's
death provides a moment during which the sovereign power of the
nation-state, led by the Congress Party (which Gandhi was also
deeply critical of by the time of his death), could be expanded and
consolidated.

[^/18]: The affliction of South Asian dynasties such as the Bhuttos and Nehru--Gandhis
by assassination deserves further critical investigation and analysis.

[^/19]: Claus Peter Zoller and Elisabeth Schombucher (eds), _Ways of Dying: Death and its
Meanings in South Asia_ (Manohar, 1999), Stuart H. Blackburn, 'Death and Deification:
Folk Cults in Hinduism', _History of Religions_, Vol. 24, No. 3 (February, 1985),
pp. 255--274.

[^/20]: For valuable discussions of contested sovereignty in the postcolonial context see
Achille Mbembe, _On the Postcolony_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2001);
Thomas Blom Hansen and Finn Steputtat (eds), _Sovereign Bodies: Citizens, Migrants and
States in the Postcolonial World_ (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2005); Thomas
J. Biersteker and Cynthia Weber (eds), _State Sovereignty as Social Construct_ (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1996).

This is not to suggest either a simplistic reductionism in which
the power of the secular state becomes fixed, sovereign and settled
after Gandhi's death. Clearly this had to be constantly remade and
reiterated. Riots continued alongside the economic and political
marginalization of Muslims and myriad problems concerning the
consolidation of the nation state. The public reactions to Gandhi's
assassination made a decisive difference in the reception of state-centric
articulations of secularism by inscribing power in a particular
idiom at a time when alternative Hindu-nationalist formations had
been far from discredited. Grassroots interpretations of Gandhi's
assassination intersected with the modernizing and memorializing
political discourse of the Congress. The ways in which the Congress
acted as 'the state' during the funeral was vital. The bestowing of the
ashes, organization of the rituals without colonial constraints, and use
of the full force of the media and governmental resources, interlinked
provinces and districts through a chain of instructions and commands.

Debates about the nature of the state in postcolonial South Asia
have pointed to the Nehruvian state's distance and detachment
from everyday, commonsense and quotidian life in the 1950s. The
state led a project of transformation, regulating citizens' bodies and
naturalizing sovereign power while unexpectedly colliding with the
upward pressures of alternative centres of sovereignty. There has also
been increasing 'entanglement', in the words of Partha Chatterjee,
of elite and subaltern politics since independence.[^/22] In this light,
Gandhi's death and attendant rituals sit within a specific matrix
of circumstances at a critical juncture, where both temporally and
spatially the sovereignty of the postcolonial state was still uncertain.
The contested nature of state sovereignty and the human and
ideological insecurity was part of an extended process in the months
following Partition. The vast humanitarian challenges of refugee
resettlement collided with the problems of contested borders, the
incorporation of the princely states, tense relations with Pakistan,
particularly but not solely about Kashmir, and a dark shadow over the
authority of Nehru who was engaged in private ideological tussles
with the Home Minister.[^/23] Private armies substituted for police
authority and political activists were able to heavily influence policy
and circumvent or challenge state authority or replace it altogether
at many levels of government, and in many provinces.

[^/21]: The phrase is from Achille Mbembe, _On the Postcolony_ (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2001), p. 31.

[^/22]: _See_ discussions in this Special Issue. Also, Thomas Blom Hansen and Finn
Steputtat (eds), _States of Imagination: Ethnographic Explorations of the Postcolonial State_
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2001); Thomas Blom Hansen and Finn Steputtat
(eds), _Sovereign Bodies: Citizens, Migrants and States in the Postcolonial World_ (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 2005); and Partha Chatterjee 'Sovereign Violence and
the Domain of the Political' in Hansen and Steputtat (eds), _Sovereign Bodies_, p. 85.

# The Mahatma's funeral in New Delhi, 30 January--1 February 1948

Gandhi's funeral, carried out in New Delhi within 24-hours of his
death, was a curious hybrid of colonial ritual, Hindu tradition, and
spontaneous outpourings of public grief. It was the first state spectacle
organized in independent India after Independence Day in 1947. The
funeral was an invented ritual which deviated from 'traditional' Hindu
funerary rites, for instance, the bier was not carried by kinsmen but
placed on a carriage. It was also infused with imperial echoes of the
Delhi durbars while displaying many of the tropes of the annual
Republic Day ceremony. It may have been familiar, then, in some
ways to the crowd but was also unique and unrepeatable.

The militarism of Gandhi's funeral (and the sheer irony of it)
has been observed by contemporary commentators and later writers.
Four-thousand troops, 1,000 armed men, 100 police and 100 navy
men marched in the funeral procession itself, including the Rajputana
Rifles, Madras Regiment, Bengal Sappers and Miners, Indian Signal
Corps, armoured vehicles and the mounted cavalry of the GeneralGovernor's
bodyguard. Gandhi's body was carried from Birla House[^/24]
on the morning of the funeral and placed on a converted gun carriage
which was very heavily covered in flowers and sandalwood, with only the
face of the Mahatma visible. This was pulled by troops, with relatives
and other disciples on foot in front of it.

[^/23]: Yasmin Khan, _The Great Partition: The Making of India and Pakistan_ (London: Yale
University Press, 2007). Srirupa Roy identifies the same dates, describing this as
the 'long transition' from colonial rule, _Beyond Belief_, pp. 25--26, 70. _See also_ Dipesh
Chakrabarty, Rochona Majumdar and Andrew Sartori (eds), From the Colonial to the
_Postcolonial: India and Pakistan in Transition_ (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007).
Vazira Fazila-Yacoobali _Zamindar_ emphasizes the protracted and constructed nature
of the Pakistani and Indian states during the processes accompanying Partition, _The
Long Partition and the Making of Modern South Asia: Refugees, Boundaries, Histories_ (New
York: Columbia University Press, 2007).

At a quarter to mid-day the cortege pulled out of the driveway to the
sound of blown conch-shells. The procession moved from Albuquerque
road onto Queensway then onto Kingsway and to the India Gate, which
it reached less than an hour later, with Gurkhas and paratroopers
proceeding in front in order to clear the way. Baldev Singh, Nehru and
Patel were seated alongside the body by this time on the main vehicle
itself, with Gandhi's son, Devdas Gandhi, as the chief mourner, seated
at the head of the vehicle. The kinship of the leading Congressmen
with Gandhi was therefore visibly emphasized with Nehru naturally
assuming the role of 'son and heir'. The cortege then moved through
the Memorial Gate and then to Hardinge Avenue, Mathura Road and
Powerhouse Road (one reminder of the ongoing process of transition to
independence was that these roads were still bearing their old names)
ending at the bank on the edge of the river Yamuna.

State funerals had been used consciously as a political tool within
and between imperial states prior to independence.[^/25] The elaborate
design, planning and execution of Gandhi's last rites was a self-conscious
manifestation of state (and the Congress Party) sovereignty
intended to inscribe state power (and the power, as Thomas Blom
Hansen has put it of the 'sublime state')[^/26] at a time of acute crisis
in the legal, policing and governmental strategies of the state. In
the processional part of the funeral the 'Hindu-ness' of Gandhi was
thoroughly marginalized. Infused with colonial symbolism, certain
aspects of the ceremony could have been replicated along Whitehall
or the Mall in London. Indeed it echoed explicitly the state funerals
of British monarchs in the use of flags at half-mast, the guncarriage,
military pageantry and use of a crowd-lined mall. The funeral
was extensively photographed by Henri Cartier-Bresson and other
international photographers and also aerially photographed. It was
projected into the homes and marketplaces of Indians who could not
attend through a specially relayed live All India Radio broadcast. This
lengthy outdoor broadcast in itself was a technological feat which
utilized the latest technology such as a mobile transmitter van.[^/27]

[^/24]: Birla house was at 5 Albuquerque Road, renamed after the date of Gandhi's
death as Tees January Marg.

[^/25]: Modern state funerals in Britain were a Victorian innovation. When the Nawab
of Oudh was deposed in 1856, the exiled Queen Mother travelled to Europe. She
died in Paris and was given a French state funeral as a diplomatic snub to Britain.
Controversies continue about the political implications of state funerals in South Asia;
consider the debates about Mother Theresa's televised state funeral in 1998.

[^/26]: In understanding this, Thomas Blom Hansen offers a useful analytical
framework. He examines the 'myth of the state' in India, in other words, the multiple
ways in which the state is understood and perceived. He argues that the Indian state
is typically imagined in a dual way; on one side there is the 'profane' aspect of the
state, which encompasses the self-interest, brutality and banality in the humdrum of
everyday administration. Corruption, violence and inefficiency would all be included
in this category. On the other side stands the 'sublime' aspects of the mysterious and
powerful state, which is known through 'its hidden resources, designs and immense
power, and the higher forms of rationality or even justice believed to prevail there'.
Ordinary Indians look to the state as the arbiter of legitimate claims and the provider
of law and order, even if on many occasions it fails in this role. It is therefore essential
that this myth of the state is upheld. T. Blom Hansen, 'Governance and Myths of
State in Mumbai' in, Chris J. Fuller and Veronique Beneii (eds), _The Everyday State and
Society in Modern India_ (London: Hurst, 2001), pp. 34--38.

The appropriation of, and expansion into, the grand colonial
architectural spaces of Lutyen's and Herbert Baker's Delhi, in parallel
with ceremonies and rituals on Independence Day and Republic Days,
was deliberate. It speaks clearly of the explicit aim of linking Gandhi
(who after all had no formal political position within the state at
the time and had of course worked in opposition to many of the
power monopolies and militarism of the Westphalian nation-state)
to the visible architecture of Delhi's state power. This did not pass
unremarked upon by eye-witnesses, particularly the design of the
route which entailed the body passing under the India Arch, now called
'India Gate'. He was the first Indian to be 'honoured' in such a way.
'His going under the India Gate was perhaps symbolic. Alive he would
have scoffed at the idea', noted one observer.[^/28] Naturally the personal
role of Mountbatten who had remained in India as Governor-General
and was a very astute believer in, and manipulator of, theatrical and
public pageantry was also a hidden hand behind the planning of these
aspects of the funeral procession. The crowds, as seen in news reels
and photographs, were spectacularly large and densely packed and
stood mostly in a 'passive' role as stunned and silent onlookers. Nehru
had paternalistically reminded people of the need for silence and had,
interestingly, requested no 'demonstrations' on the radio the evening
before. Some had scrambled up trees and lamp posts in order to try and
take _darshan_ (sight) of the Mahatma and the silence was punctuated
with loud cries of '_Mahatma Gandhi ki Jai_' and '_Mahatma Gandhi Zindabad_'
(Long live Gandhi).

[^/27]: Sabeena Gadihoke, 'Uncovering Histories: Homai Vyarawalla and chronicling
the nation' in _Homage to Mahatma Gandhi_ (Unpublished paper, Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library, New Delhi). The appropriation and use of All India Radio
by the Congress was another important way to extend imagined sovereignty in 1947--1948 --- a medium with national reach but tightly controlled and closed to political
leaders until independence. After independence Congress made regular use of the
medium to convey national messages. See Alasdair Pinkerton, 'Radio and the Raj:
broadcasting in British India (1920--1940)', _Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society_ ISSN
1356--1863, Volume 18.2, 2008, pp. 167--191.

At the site of the pyre at Rajghat, shrubs and nettles had been
cleared to create a space for the cremation and a brick and mud
platform was raised on which the pyre was built. The intended plan
was that the dignitaries and relatives would assemble close to the
pyre. The crowds were to be held back from the main site by a cordon
of barbed wire which was at least one hundred yards away from the
platform where the body lay. The barrier was manned by mounted
troops who were charged with holding back the pressing crowds. The
ceremony was to be public, but not so public that all Indians could
participate in it, and ambassadors and other foreign dignitaries were
privileged in their nearness to the body. The Chinese ambassador, for
instance, was the first to lay a wreath at the foot of the pyre. Lord and
Lady Mountbatten, who had absented themselves consciously from the
procession, now also joined the inner circle and were seated around
the cremation site. The national flag was removed from the body and
sandalwood logs were piled up on top of it. Ramdas Gandhi performed
the lighting of the pyre and the attending priest, Pandit Ram Dhan
Sharma, recited Vedic texts.

As the flames climbed upwards crowds surged forward against the
cordon, broke it and rushed forward 'dangerously close to the pyre'.
Troops were directed to intervene and Nehru was personally seen
urging people to go back while leading members of the cabinet picked
up small children. Eventually, mounted lancers were used to physically
press back the people who had come to see Gandhi's last rites. The
spatial and hierarchical distance of the VIPs was therefore vigorously
and repeatedly reinforced through the cordoning off of separate areas,
the use of barbed wire and the _lathi_ charges and use of mounted troops.
Leading politicians stressed the need for orderly discipline throughout
the crowds.[^/29]

[^/28]: K. L. Gauba, _The Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi_ (Bombay: Jaico, 1969), p. 160.
These colonial continuities in ritual planning have been remarked upon in other
contexts; the assumption of pre-colonial motifs and rituals by the British in colonial
_darbars_ and, in the post-1947 years, the postcolonial state's appropriation of restyled
imperial ritual for events like Republic Day. Bernard Cohn, _An Anthropologist among
the Historians and Other Essays_ (Delhi: Oxford University Press, 1996); Jim Masselos,
'India's Republic Day: The Other 26 January', _South Asia_ Vol. 19 (special issue) (1996),
pp. 183--203; Roy, _Beyond Belief_, pp. 66--105.

The funeral itself the was undoubtedly a spectacular sight but
appears to have been oddly disconnected from the mass of Indian
people in the crowd who, for the most part, were consigned to playing
the roles allotted by Nehru as onlookers, passive crowds, respectfully
distanced from the Mahatma's body. This spectacle was orientated
in many ways to the international gaze. The importance of Gandhi
as a Great Man in the eyes of the world's leading politicians was
paramount. Gandhi's greatness and by extension, Indian-ness itself,
were being honoured and making headline news from Washington
DC to Beijing. This global recognition was another important
ingredient of Gandhi's death. This was particularly pronounced on the
political right-wing. The Uttar Pradesh Congressman Purushottam
Das Tandon emphasized how, 'World history will still remember
him when many other figures strutting the world stage today are
forgotten'.[^/30] It was only the beginning of a wide series of official and
semi-official mourning rituals and contrasts with the wide array of
mourning practices all over India.

# A fortnight of mourning and the immersion of Gandhi's ashes

In contrast to the official state funeral, which had been organized
by the Commander-in-Chief and centred upon Delhi and orientated
towards the international gaze, local and state level mourning took
on vernacular forms which far transcended official instructions and
orders from the Congress Party. Gandhi emerged now as a saintly
personage and even miracle-worker and his corporeal relics took on
a special importance. It was this mediation of the funereal rites
by the public which transformed the rituals from empty or 'banal'
state-centred gestures and infused them with political meaning and
transformative possibilities. It may have instigated the groundswell of
feeling in favour of 'secularism/toleration' towards non-Muslims. This
gave much-needed credibility to Nehruvian secularism with which this
historical moment is now so well (and rightly) associated.

[^/29]: The disciplining of crowds took on new dimensions now that the Congress was
the party of sovereign power, raising critical questions about the legitimacy of crowd
action. See Dipesh Chakrabarty, 'In the name of politics: Sovereignty, Democracy and
the Multitude in India' _Economic and Political Weekly_, 23 July, 2005.

[^/30]: _The Pioneer_, 2 February, 1948. _The Pioneer_, a Lucknow-based English language
paper, contained particularly detailed reports on the funeral and its aftermath in 1948.

Almost immediately after Gandhi's death a struggle over how to
honour his memory and how to dispose of his physical body began. A
strong lobby for embalming Gandhi's body in the manner of Lenin was
fought off with Nehru's personal intervention. He even mentioned it
in his address to the nation the night preceding the funeral. 'It was his
wish repeatedly expressed that this should not be done ... we decided
we must follow his wishes in this matter no matter how much others
might have wished otherwise'.[^/31]

However, although traditional cremation was decided upon, the
veneration of Gandhi's body and, after his cremation, of his relics, went
far beyond state-sanctioned or officially orchestrated proceedings.
After the actual _darshan_ of the body itself was no longer possible,
following the cremation ceremony, the crowds continued to pursue a
physical connection with Gandhi, preferably by looking at or touching
his bodily remains, or if that was not possible, by _puja_ (reverent
worship) and prayers in front of his image. There was a clamber for
Gandhi's bodily remains, both physically at the site of Raj Ghat and
then in many ensuing debates surrounding the distribution of his
ashes. After the pyre had burned out at Raj Ghat on the evening of
the funeral, even late at night large crowds still remained. 'There was
a great scramble and a diligent search for small twigs of the sandal
chips near the pyre and many were seen with the greatest reverence
picking up withered and trodden rose petals, picking up twigs from the
mound of wreaths or bits of ash blown by the breeze'.[^/32] At the site of
the place where the Mahatma had fallen as a result of the gunshots at
Birla house, the spot where his blood had fallen also became a sacred
site and a deep pit emerged as people gathered up handfuls of the
earth,

>at the back of Birla House bamboo poles have been erected round the spot
where Mahatma Gandhi fell in order to discourage the public from scooping
handfuls of earth to preserve as sacred souvenirs. There was already a pit
over a foot deep. A large number of people visited the spot today and offered
prayers.[^/33]

[^/31]: _Ibid_., 31 January, 1948.

[^/32]: _Ibid_., 2 February, 1948.

Indeed, access to this site itself became controversial and highly
contested. Birla House introduced visiting hours as a way of managing
the crowds and the Congress High Command received bitter
complaints about denial of access to the site. As Bhagwan Das Halna
wrote to Nehru,

>I beg to apologise to write this letter to you. Had it not been a matter of
>utmost national importance, I would certainly not have troubled you with it.
>
>The thing is that not only I but millions of Indians think that the place where
>the Mahatmaji was shot dead has become sacred and is like a pilgrimage
>to us. On the evening of 13^th^ March 48 I went to Birla House to pay my
>respectful homage to this sacred place but was told that people were not
>allowed to enter in Birla House for this purpose since 11^th^ February. I was
>simply dumbfounded and had to return very sadly and with tears in my
>eyes. ...
>
>>When _pacci vedi_ \[an altar\] has been constructed there and when the same is
>worshipped daily with flowers according to press reports, we also should not
>be deprived of that _puja_.[^/34]

Some demanded that the bones should be preserved rather
than scattered and telegrammed in protest. 'Gandhiji's ashes alone
may be dissolved. Request preservation of bones as sacred relics.
Recalling preservation of Buddha's relics. Pray issue instructions'.[^/35]
Indeed, this explicit parallel drawn with Buddha was not far-fetched.
During the two-week mourning period, Gandhi's former role as a
political leader, associated with politicized decisions such as the
balance of payments settlement with Pakistan, seems to have been
transcended. As the day of the immersion ceremony at the _sangam_
at Allahabad approached, one English language newspaper headline
even suggested, ambivalently, 'Mahatma Gandhi being worshipped'.[^/36]

[^/33]: _Ibid_., 2 February, 1948.

[^/34]: Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, All India Congress Committee papers
G-8 Part 2 (1947) \[Hereafter AICC\], Bhagwan Das Halna to Nehru 19 March, 1948.
In his reply on 9 April, the Congress secretary, Sadiq Ali, acknowledged, 'We are
aware of the widespread feeling in the matter you have raised in your letter. The
matter is receiving our serious consideration.'

[^/35]: _The Pioneer_, 9 February, 1948, Telegram to Nehru.

[^/36]: _Ibid_., 11 February, 1948.

Most significantly of all, the national fortnight of mourning declared
by the Congress leadership coincidentally coincided with the holding
of the Ardh Kumbh Mela at Allahabad, or Prayag, at the confluence
of three rivers Ganga, Yamuna and Saraswati, which was held every
six years and at which thousands of sadhus, gurus and pilgrims had
gathered for a mass ritual bathing, for the cleansing of past sins. At
the camp at the Ardh Kumbh Mela, thousands of pilgrims daily were
praying in front of a large portrait of the Mahatma which had been
placed on a dais with a _charkha_ (spinning wheel) in front of it, and
the Quran and the Gita on either side of it. They were reported to be
'worshipping the dais as a temple of God and many of them have even
offered coins as is customary in temples of other deities'.[^/37]

Over the following fortnight the kinship of the deceased and his
relationship to the broader community were constantly articulated
and made explicit in the rituals themselves and in the wider media
commentary. The paternalistic role of '_Bapu_' (Father) had a long
lineage in the anti-colonial movement. After death this status was
reinforced by a gendered vocabulary which stressed the orphaning
and child-likeness of the people left without their leader. Devdas
Gandhi spoke of his countrymen as 'fellow orphans' and the headline
of _The Pioneer_, marked with a black border on 31 January, proclaimed
'The nation is fatherless'. Devdas' broadcast on All India Radio was
an intimate and personal account of Gandhi's last days and minutes.
and the procedures for dealing with the body after his passing. This
included details of his final breaths, how the body was undressed and
the location of clots of blood. This metaphor of Gandhi as the father
and co-parent to Mother India was prevalent in the following two
weeks. Intimate rituals, usually closed to all but the closest kin, were
shared by all. Although the family were closely involved, the Congress
was also projected as an extended 'family' and Nehru was very much
the 'son' and heir with his own political status and authority clearly
reinforced in the aftermath of the death.

The collective responsibility for Gandhi's death, as stressed by
Nehru and Congress leaders, was reiterated in public discourse.[^/38]
This also had resonance with Indian understandings of death. An
innocent victim, subject to a sudden and violent death, universally
carries a special status across varieties of Hindu belief. A 'bad or
untimely death', which has come suddenly and at the hands of a
murderer, can only be redeemed or transmuted into a 'good death'
(_akal mrityu_) through the actions and good intentions of those who serve
the deceased. In this context, the extraordinary outpouring of grief and
ritual honouring of Gandhi's memory and image, and the substantive
political changes which occurred almost immediately in the aftermath
of Gandhi's death, can be properly understood. There was almost
obsessive concern about the manner and timing of Gandhi's death
and an intimate association between the people and the deceased as
a paternalistic presence.

[^/37]: _Ibid_., 11 February, 1948.

[^/38]: _See_ for example, N. N. Agarwala, _India's Saviour Crucified: A challenge for us to think
and act_ (Agra: Shiva Publication, 1948).

As Jonathan Parry writes, ghosts are likely to recur unless
'appropriate propitiatory rituals are perfectly performed'.[^/39] In the
classical reading, Gandhi's own death would have been a product of his
own bad karma. This almost unthinkable proposition posed a challenge
for the society in which it had taken place. A bad death could at least
be transmuted into a better one by propitiatory rituals and by a time of
tranquillity and good fortune. This had a direct political implication
and there was a repeated emphasis in the political rhetoric on the
notion of shame. Gandhi's death was a _product_ of the Indian people's
own wrongdoing and had to be borne and atoned for by society as
a collective 'family'. As Nehru said, 'We are all responsible for this
unprecedented tragedy. ... It is a disgrace that \[the\] people of India
could not save Mahatma Gandhi'.[^/40] In the crowds of mourners for
Gandhi, symbolic acts such as head shaving, the removal of shoes and
the donning of white _khadi_ became widespread.[^/41]

# The distribution of Gandhi's ashes

The fortnight of official mourning and the immersion ceremony
in Allahabad, during which Gandhi's ashes were immersed in the
confluence of the rivers welded together a collective sense of
responsibility for Gandhi's death. This was twinned with renewed
respect for the Congress Party and an enhanced sense of state power.
The rituals involved a long circuitous special train journey that carried
Gandhi's ashes through the Uttar Pradesh political heartland of both
Congress and Hindu nationalism. Then the Congress parcelled out
ashes to all states of India. This played a decisive role in linking
together reverence for Gandhi with the authority of the Congress and
the state.

[^/39]: Jonathan Parry, _Death in Banaras_ (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), pp. 161--162.

[^/40]: Sarvepalli Gopal, (ed.), _Selected Works of Jawaharlal Nehru_ \[hereafter _SWJN_\]
(New Delhi, Oxford University Press) 2nd series, 5, pp. 63, 65. Speech at Jullundur, 24 February, 1948.

[^/41]: There were also parallels here with the death of princely rulers, such as the death
of _Maharaja_ Umaid Singh in 1947 and _Maharaja_ Hanwant Singh of Jodhpur in 1952.
These deaths were similarly not simply family matters but demanded widespread
and overt public mourning over two weeks in which members of all communities
participated by paying their respects, often by visiting the royal palace, many also
shaving their heads. See Marzia Balzani, _Modern Indian Kingship: Tradition, Legitimacy
and Power in Jodhpur_ (Oxford: James Currey, 2003), p. 45.

The train, the Asthi Special,which carried Gandhi's ashes to the
_prayag_ (confluence) at Allahabad was made up of five third-class
carriages. The urn was placed in the middle carriage, heavily covered
in flowers and _khadi_ flags and illuminated by six electric lights, and
so clearly visible to spectators from the platform. Large images of the
_charkha_ and Ashoka's national lion seal were painted on the carriage.
The deliberately engendered closeness between the national flag and
the Congress flag, which were easily confused, was also reinforced
by the presence of both national and Congress flags on the train. The
train halted at ten stops in western Uttar Pradesh during its journey
to Allahabad where vast crowds had assembled to take _darshan_.[^/42]

These rituals clearly drew upon earlier forms of Congress
organization and resembled in many ways the Gandhian _satyagrahas_
and Congress activities of a nostalgically-remembered Gandhian
heyday.[^/43] The funeral train, weaving its way from city to city in
North India in 1948, presented a very familiar echo of earlier trains
from which the fortunate could catch a _darshan_ of the Mahatma.
Many of the same people may have stood in the crowds. Black flags,
used in the _hartals_ (strikes) and processions of the Non-Cooperation,
Civil Disobedience and Quit India movements, were a symbol of
mourning but also resonant of these former days of public protest.
Another familiar aspect was the role of the pledge, a regular Congress
staple employed on Independence days and Republic days. Numerous
speeches of Congress leaders in the aftermath of Gandhi's death
mentioned the need to pledge to communal peace, to honour Gandhi's
principles and stressed the moment as a redemptive one. Pledges were
solemnly sworn on the day of the funeral in collective meetings.[^/44]

[^/42]: There are echoes of President Lincoln's funeral in 1865 which utilized a very
long and public train journey through America and acted to cohere a divided public
at a critical moment. See Barry Schwartz, 'Mourning and the Making of a Sacred
Symbol'.

[^/43]: Shahid Amin, for instance, has stressed the importance of train carriages and
train stoppages during Gandhian campaigns of the early 1920s. Shahid Amin, _Event,
Metaphor, Memory: Chauri Chaura 1922--1992_ (Delhi: Penguin edition, 2006), p. 189.

The ceremonies also acted as physical places for old Congress
comrades to meet with one another. Congressmen from all the UP
provinces and adjoining provinces assembled at Allahabad for the
immersion of the ashes. Nostalgic and sorrowful meetings acted
as a way of reconsolidating Congress and as part of the party's
purification process. Centrally-directed commemorations were not a
new innovation for the Congress and Lisa Trivedi has emphasized
the importance of the 'visual consistency' of ritual holidays and
the 'reconfiguration of time' by _swadeshi_ proponents from the
1920s onwards, underpinned by specific calendars and well ordered
agendas.[^/45] Gandhi's _jayanti_ had long been celebrated annually in
October and dates such as his incarcerations and fasts had been
marked in the past. The death anniversaries of leaders such as Lala
Lajpat Rai, G. B. Tilak and Bhagat Singh had long been signalled
by processions, hagiographical press articles and emphasis on their
sacrifices. In short, very familiar political tropes from the campaigns
of the 1920s and 1930s (but which had become associated with an
outdated mode of politics in many ways by the late 1940s) were revived
by the funeral spectacle. The striking difference of course, now, was
that the Congress had displaced British power and these Congress
idioms could be presented as officially sanctioned government symbols.
The funeral may have superficially, and initially, born all the hallmarks
of imperial British ritual imposed from on high but this was rapidly
subverted and transformed into a more complex interaction between
Indian people and nationalist memory.

In this light, the decision to distribute some of Gandhi's ashes from
Delhi to all the states of India was a political masterstroke on the part
of the Congress. The instruction that ashes should be scattered in
local rivers, spatially linked together India in a modern 'cartographic
imaginary'. This linked together the provinces of India with India's
physical geography and Gandhi's actual bodily remains. This network
radiated out from Delhi and was under direct Congress control and
supervision.[^/46] The ashes would be divided and portions would be
sent to every provincial government, under the guidance of the state
governors, who arrived in Delhi to collect the urns. The provincial
governments were then directed to divide the ashes into three parts
and to allocate them within their province. In reality this rule was
flouted. In Bombay all ministers received a portion. The distribution
of the ashes became a deeply political act, as provinces, leaders and
districts struggled to assert their right to receive a portion of the sacred
ashes. 'There has been keen competition and pressing requests have
been received both by the provincial governments and in Delhi for portions
of the ashes from places not in the programme'.[^/47] Quite plainly,
there were not enough to go round. These can not simply be seen as
acts of commemoration but became closely intertwined both with the
extension and consolidation of political power by Congress provincial
cadres and the marginalisation of opponents and factional rivals.
The immersion ceremonies also provided an opportunity for the regrouping
of Congressmen who came from long distances to participate.

[^/44]: One, printed in a pamphlet, to be completed by the reader, read as follows: 'I,
rudely shaken to my very foundations by the sudden and unexpected demise of _Bapuji_,
the Father of Our Nation, hereby pledge that I shall do everything possible, by action
and thought, to see his cause succeed. I will see ---

      a) That communalism is eradicated
      from every walk of our life
      b) That untouchability is liquidated once and for all, and
      c) That Social and Economic Democracy is brought into reality, that being the latest
      mission which Gandhiji laid down in the Harijan.
    
      I am affixing my signature to this
      pledge, after full realisation of the difficulties involved as also the significance of this
      mission. Babuji Zindabad, Jai Hind.' (Agarwala, _India's Saviour Crucified_, unpaginated.)

[^/45]: Lisa Trivedi, _Clothing Gandhi's Nation: Homespun and Modern India_ (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 2007), pp. 102--108.

The final part of the programme included the following rivers:
Godvari at Nasik, Krishna at Bezwada, Cauvery at Srirangam,
Sabarmati at Ahmedabad, Hooghly at Calcutta, Sutlej in East Punjab,
Mahanadi in Orissa, Rivers Gomti and Gaya, the Brahmaputra
in Assam, the Pavnar at Wardha and the seashores at Puri,
Rameshwaram, Cape Cormorin and Porbunder. In reality, an
underground trade in these ashes quickly developed and there are
still at least two (unauthorized) places (one in the USA and one in
India) where people claim to have possession of Gandhi's ashes. In
1997, ashes were uncovered in an urn in a bank vault in northern
India, and were later scattered at the confluence of the Yamuna and
Ganges rivers. Some ashes scattered in 2008 had been kept by Sriman
Narayan, a businessman and associate of Gandhi and passed into
the hands of his son, a businessman based in Dubai, upon Narayan's
death.[^/48]

[^/46]: On cartography and the visualization of space in modern India see Sumathi
Ramaswamy (ed.) _Beyond Appearances: Visual Practices and Ideologies in Modern India_ (Delhi:
Sage Publications, 2003).

[^/47]: _The Pioneer_, 9 February, 1948.

[^/48]: Father of the nation laid to rest: the afterlife of Mahatma Gandhi'. _The
Independent_, Thursday, 31 January, 2008.

It seems far from coincidental that several of the locations selected
for the receipt of ashes were afflicted by inter-religious conflict.
Decisions were motivated by the idea that social tensions could be
alleviated by Gandhi's 'presence' in the form of ashes, just as in
life his presence had been a calming presence in riot-torn areas. In
Punjab, where the severe refugee crisis continued on a daily basis,
military and police led the procession for the consignment to the
River Sutlej. The contested state of Hyderabad was not initially in
the list of destinations scheduled to receive a portion of the remains,
but was added as a last-minute inclusion to the list. The prominent
participation of princely rulers also emphasized the inclusiveness of
the event. The distribution of the ashes of Gandhi, in particular, was
a way for the Congress Party to extend its patronage to rulers who
were weakened by the Partition crisis and wanted to cement their
affiliation with the Congress settlement or, conversely, to marginalize
and undermine the legitimacy of others. A special train was laid on
from Rampur, the small Muslim majority princely state in western
Uttar Pradesh, which had been affected by violent protests due to the
state's accession to India. The Nawab of Rampur and 'leading Hindu
and Muslim citizens of the state' came to Delhi to collect an urn of
ashes, which was then carried back to the city, where the ashes were
placed in a local river.[^/49]

In a country where large crowds frequently constitute and shape the
performance of politics, the scale of public involvement in Gandhi's
death rituals deserves to be restated. The division of the ashes into
parts, and the spiritual force with which they were vested meant
that Gandhi could literally _be in hundreds of places at once_ in February 1948. Special trains carried people from the districts to attend the
immersion ceremonies. Meetings were held in mosques, churches,
temples, educational institutions, trade unions, clubs, Congress
committees and bar associations. The moment could also be utilized
as a way of squaring conflict and providing an extraordinary outlet
for reconciliation which would otherwise have been unavailable. A
disputed plot of land contested by Hindus and Muslims in Bangla
Bazaar, a suburb of Lucknow, was dedicated as a space to raise a
memorial to Gandhi instead.

The manner in which Gandhi's remains were linked to the
architectural spaces of the state, particularly provincial assembly
buildings, is also worth noting. In many other states, the prime
minister, governor, ministers and members of the public filed past
the ashes which had been placed in a glass case in a porch-way
of the provincial assembly building alongside a vast portrait of the
Mahatma. Gandhi's image and memory were linked to the state's
physical machinery and to its municipal buildings, provincial assembly
buildings, bureaucrats and symbols.[^/50]

[^/49]: _The Pioneer_, 9 February, 1948.

# Memorialization

Nehru was strikingly self-conscious about Gandhi's memorialization.
and reflexive about the ways in which Gandhi's memory could be
appropriated for national causes after his death. While wishing
to honour him and to avoid opportunistic commemoration he was
also astute about the utility of Gandhi's death-memorials to the
national cause. The importance of theatricality, performance, ritual
and commemoration was as well understood by Nehru as by his
viceregal predecessor --- '... brick and mortar has its uses' he wrote
on a proposed national memorial for Gandhi, 'and is desirable to give
some solid and substantial shape to our work. This has a psychological
importance and a permanence'.[^/51]

The ownership of Gandhi's memory and its connection to state
power, however, rapidly became a challenge to centralized authority.
Nehru in particular consistently attempted to define the limits of
commemoration and to create a centralized monopoly on the project
of Gandhi's memorialization. Provincial Congress cadres and local
groups went too far and Nehru complained that too many streets and
places were being named after Gandhi which would result in confusion.
He was concerned at signs of coercive actions to extract donations to
Gandhi memorial funds. He intervened to reverse an order making
compulsory deductions from the salaries of civil service officers in
Uttar Pradesh.[^/52] He also personally oversaw the sites associated with
the cremation and funeral. 'The surface of the platform on which
Mahatma Gandhi's body was cremated may be cemented in order that
people in search of sacred earth from the spot will not be able to tamper
with it' he instructed within days of the cremation.[^/53] Concrete, then,
the ultimate symbol of the modernizing and developmental aspirations
of the postcolonial state, could, quite literally, be used to seal
Gandhi's memory and to limit people's interaction with his corporeal
remains. Nehru also made protestations about 'unauthorized' or public
expressions of grief in the form of statues, basing his arguments on an
aesthetic sensibility underpinned by a hierarchy of artistic expression
which is worth quoting at length:

>Nevertheless, it is perhaps inevitable that some statues might be put up. If so,
the greatest care should be taken that only real works of art are permitted.
Unfortunately the standard in India of such statuary has been low and most
people are satisfied with anything that bears a remote resemblance to the
person concerned. Our cities and public places are full of structures which
cannot by any stretch of the imagination be called artistic or pleasing to
the sight. I have been shocked on many occasions at seeing these totally
inadequate efforts. I should like to warn most earnestly those who are thinking
in terms of having statues not to take any hasty decisions and to await a full
consideration of this question by the National Memorial Committee under
the chairmanship of the Congress President.[^/54]

[^/50]: Film footage of the regional ceremonies reinforces this point and suggests the
ways in which state officials were involved, the scale of crowd participation and
the different ceremonial procedures accompanying the immersion of the ashes into
the waters. See _Babuji's Demise_ _available at_ [http://www.gandhiserve.org] \[accessed 27
September 2010\]. This film shows the immersion of Gandhi's ashes, processions,
crowds and ceremonies at Allahabad, Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, Kanya Kumari,
Travancore, Cochin, Ahmedabad, Kandla and Nasik.

[^/51]: Valmiki Choudhary (ed.), _Dr. Rajendra Prasad: Correspondence and Select Documents_
(Allied Publishers, 1984--1995), vol. 8, p. 58. Note from Nehru on proposed national
memorial for Gandhi.

This intervention was a pronounced attempt again by the new
prime minister to reassert the authority and sovereignty of the
state in public spaces. This speaks of the distance between the
Nehruvian executive and its secular logic and the vernacularization
of commemoration, grief and memorialization in a different cultural
register. The Congress High Command tried to discipline the ways in
which Gandhi was remembered, Nehru deploring temples, statues and
other memorial shrines which would 'savour of idolatry' being erected
all over the country. Nevertheless, public expressions of grief were
outrunning the 'authoritative' versions of public commemoration.[^/55]

These events also worked as the end of an era. There was closure
on the nationalist struggle which was associated with Gandhi more
than with any other human being. As P. Sitaramayya, a future All
India Congress president, stated in his tribute in an All India Radio
broadcast in early February 1948:

>Mahatma Gandhi had finished his task and while the world will mourn his
>loss, by no means premature but altogether unnatural, we must recognise
>that as an '_avatar_' that has finished his task has no place anymore in the
>domain of his functioning. ...
>
>He is the tenth _avatar_ that has descended into the world in this age of _kali_ to
>make _dharma_ walk on two legs. Indeed since June last year Mahatma Gandhi
>had reason to feel that he was outliving his need and that the gulf between
>his concept of society and policy and the accepted concepts around him was
>widening. The *avatars* in the past met with such a crisis on the eve of their
>nirvana.[^/56]

[^/52]: _SWJN_, 2nd series, Vol. 6, pp. x. Letter to Pant, 18 June, 1948.

[^/53]: _SWJN_, 2nd
series, Vol. 5, pp. 45--46. Undated note accepted by the cabinet on 3
February, 1948.

[^/54]: _SWJN_, 2nd series, Vol. 5, p. 66. Statement to the press, 25 February, 1948.

[^/55]: _SWJN_, 2nd
series, Vol. 5, p. 66. Statement to the press, 25 February, 1948.

This reflected a widespread sense that Gandhi's death had
completed his work. His death marked a temporal shift and
underscored transitions from colonialism to post-colonialism in the
profoundest sense. A most compelling question is to what extent
Gandhi himself may have anticipated this, or even had a death-wish,
as Ashis Nandy has speculated. In this light, Nehru's observation that
'Even in his death there was a magnificence and complete artistry'
could not be more fitting.[^/57]

In this way it was not only the _grief_ which accompanied Gandhi's
death which made it a seminal moment in the foundation of the Indian
state's legitimacy, but the sheer _fact_ of his death. Whether it was
mourned, celebrated, or discussed as a legal case or as a source of
conspiracy theories and intrigues, indifference to such an event was
impossible and the shared experience of his death developed a new
sense of Indian-ness. Spatially this gap between citizens and state was
narrowed by the close connections between the capital, New Delhi and
the transmission by radio, newspaper and film of the rituals which were
taking place across the country (and within the new country's borders)
and then, later, of the trial of Nathuram Godse. Today this point is
upheld by 'Gandhi's prominence in local memories of independence
and partition' and, as Peter Gottschalk has described in his fieldwork
probing contemporary memories of Gandhi's death, 'the ubiquitous
description by Arampur residents of Gandhi as _rashtrapita_ (father of
the nation) demonstrates the determination and success of the state
to craft a memory that recognizes independence as both continuous
with a venerable past and discontinuous with foreign domination'.[^/58]

[^/56]: _Times of India_, 5 February, 1948.

[^/57]: _SWJN_, 2nd series, Vol. 5, p. 48. Written on 5 February and published in _Harijan_, 15
February, 1948. This also poses questions about the political culture of assassination
in South Asia more generally, which could be explored further in relation to members
of the Bhutto and Nehru--Gandhi dynasties.

# Conclusion

Distinguishing mourning from the rituals through which this
mourning was enacted is not possible. However, the materiality
of Gandhi's memorialization is surely not insignificant. Public and
ritualized responses to Gandhi's death enabled the state to attempt
to demarcate the extent of its power. The grey and poorly delineated.
legacies of citizenship, of marking out who was an Indian or a Pakistani
and where borders lay, was complex and lasted for many years after
Independence. But Gandhi's death was a critical moment at which
Indian-state-ness was graphically inscribed by the Congress. The
rituals following Gandhi's death also performed a critical bridging
function between the state and the people. It enabled the reassertion
of nation-state legitimacy in a new form at a time when the pluralistic
and liberal legal framework of India's future constitution was far from
assured. This was a collision-moment of the public and private, of
state and society and an entanglement of the past and the future.
It marked not simply the _de-legitimization_ of the right and extremist
forces but the actual _legitimization_, or at least nominal acceptance of,
the new authority of the post-Partition, Congress-led, state. This state
was both a spatial geographical settlement and centre of sovereign
authority. This may have remained a Congress aspiration rather than
a reality in places, and other lower order legitimacies continued to
compete for power. Yet there is evidence of a sharp reduction in
inter-ethnic violence and a greater acceptance of the secular message
of the state immediately after Gandhi's death. The rituals following
Gandhi's death contained all the collective emotional resonance, inner
contradictions and localized interpretations of a Gandhian movement
staged in colonial times _alongside_ the sanction and support (rather than
resistance of) the governmental machinery of the state.

[^/58]: Peter Gottschalk, 'A Mahatma for Mourners and Militants: the social memories
of Mohandas Gandhi in Arampur', _Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle
East_, Vol. 25, No. 1 (2005), p. 56.
