_The ruling Left Front leadership has been quick to claim the results
of the recent civic elections in Kerala as vindicating its policies in
general and the _people's plan_ programme in particular. The
Congress-led UDF has, on the other hand, claimed that the
results were the people's verdict against the Left Front's misrule
and especially the partisan manner in which the _people's plan_
has been implemented by the CPI(M). The ground reality,
however, is rather more complicated._

\ 

Two setbacks in quick succession
can pose serious problems even for
a seasoned and seemingly tough
leadership. That precisely is what the
CPI(M)-led Left Democratic Front leadership
is hard put to cope with in Kerala.
Hardly had it recovered from the unexpected
drubbing it received at the polls
to the local bodies early last month when
it came under severe attack in the wake
of the tragic death of more than a score of
men and women following the consumption
of illicit liquor. For all its public postures
and private inquisitions, the front leadership
is clearly on the mat. And for once
the battle is being fought singly by the
CPI(M), the other constituents of the LDF
being largely content with providing no
more than their silent support.

It is however the timing of the twin
setbacks that is discomforting coming as
they did so uncomfortably close to the
crucial elections to the state assembly, due
early next year. The wailing over the human
tragedy and the alleged nexus between the
CPI(M) and the liquor lobby in the state
will doubtless subside once the promised
judicial inquiry gets into the act. There are
other factors as well. There had been worse
tragedies involving larger number of
human lives with much the same liquor
lobbies behind them when the Congress-led
United Democratic Front was in power.
And with few exceptions, all political
parties have at some time or other flirted
with the powerful, cash-rich liquor lobby
in the state as the now accused of doing.
The CPI(M) is now being pilloried partly
because it is in power and hence, well
positioned to decide and distribute patronage
and partly because it has been reportedly
a big beneficiary in recent times of
the munificence of the liquor lobby. Since
the latter is loath to do anything without
a quid pro quo, juicy stories of a possible
deal between the two are doing the rounds.

But the results of the just concluded
civic poll do foretell much more than what
the party leadership seems prepared to
concede. The immediate reaction of the
LDF leadership was true to script. It described
the poll results as a vindication of
its policies in general and the _people's plan_
programme it had pioneered in particular.
The Congress-dominated UDF, on the other
hand, claimed that it was a people's verdict
against the LDF misrule, and more importantly,
the patently partisan manner in which
the CPI(M) went about implementing the
_people's plan_.

The ground reality was much dicier.
While the LDF did succeed in scooping
a lead in the rural areas, the UDF humbled
the ruling front in the urban areas. Chipping
in, wherever possible, was the BJP,
which, despite its fledgling presence in the
state, did enough to upset the fortunes of
both the fronts in quite a few _panchayats_,
municipalities and corporations. Interestingly,
while the two fronts publicly accused
each other of having entered into an unholy
alliance with the BJP, privately neither
seemed averse to adjustments of a questionable
nature with the very same party.

The scenario turned murkier after the
polls with the two fronts coming to power,
wherever they were evenly matched, with
the help of the BJP. When it came into the
open, the LDF did a somersault by directing
those office bearers who had been
elected with the BJP support to quit their
posts. Some obliged, some dithered.
Nonetheless, it was more a damage control
exercise than a sincere act of atonement.

The results doubtless threw up several
surprises, the most striking one being the
erosion in the support base of the LDF in
general and the CPI(M) in particular. The
gains obviously went to the Congress-led
UDF in all the segments of the three-tier
dispensation. The break-up is quite revealing.
In the case of municipalities, the UDF
gained control of as many as 28, while the
LDF got the lead in 19. In five municipalities,
they were evenly matched. This
was a great climb down for the LDF, as
in the local bodies' elections held in 1995 it
had romped home in as many as 33 municipalities
against the Congress-led UDF's 18.

In the battle for the corporations, the
performance was better, though not redeeming.
Of the five corporations, the LDF
retained two, Thiruvananthapuram and
Kozhikode, while conceding Thrissur to
the UDF. The two fronts were evenly
matched in Kochi and Kollam. In the
subsequent mayoral elections, however,
the LDF nominee got elected in Kochi
corporation, thanks to the BJP, as the latter's
two corporators abstained from voting. As
for Kollam, the independents came to the
rescue of the LDF. In the 1995 election,
the LDF had a clear majority in the corporations
of Thiruvananthapuram, Kochi
and Kozhikode. Thrissur and Kollam were
made corporations only recently.

Similarly, the UDF took control of as
many as seven _block panchayats_, while the
LDF had to be content with six. In the _block
panchayat_ in Pathanamthitta district, the
two fronts shared the seats. The tally in
1995 was nine for LDF and five for UDF.

The LDF's successes were confined to
the _district panchayats_ and the _gram panchayats_.
In the former it gained a majority
in nine out of 13 _district panchayats_ that
went to the poll. The UDF share is four.
Hopefully, it will retain the Malappuram
_district panchayat_ where elections are due
shortly. This predominantly Muslim-constituency
would be a cakewalk for the UDF
what with the Muslim League, a major
constituent, being the flag carrier. Even so,
the overall position favours the LDF.

It was however, the _gram panchayats_
that really saved LDF, though even here
the final tally was much less than what it
got in the 1995 elections. In the latest
round, 'the Left Front could capture 432
of the total 932 _gram panchayats_ to which
elections were held. This is against the
UDF tally of 386. The corresponding figures
for 1995 were 585 of the LDF and
367 for the UDF out of the then total of
966 _gram panchayats_. (The boundaries were
redrawn since 1995, ostensibly for administrative
convenience but allegedly for the
benefit of the LDF.)

The incumbency factor is doubtless
brought in to explain the LDF debacle.
Evidently, this is based on the conventional
theory that _in a democracy oppositions
do not win elections, governments
lose them_. Also thrown in, for good
measure, is the oft-demonstrated Malayali
penchant for alternating the two fronts for
governance. Though relevant, neither
convincingly explains the setback suffered
by the LDF. There is much, much more
to the LDF's lacklustre performance than
these alibis.

The CPI(M) leadership was indeed
supremely confident of not merely retaining
the LDF power base in all the five
segments --- _gram panchayats_, _block
panchayats_, _district panchayats_, municipalities
and corporations --- but also of
significantly improving on its 1995 score.
The enormous optimism stemmed from
the belief that the _people's plan_ the party
had pioneered and the goodies it bestowed
on the people, particularly in the _panchayats_,
would automatically ensure electoral
success. In fact, at one stage no less
a person than chief minister E K Nayanar
even dared the opposition to take the civic
poll as a referendum on the twin programmes
of democratic decentralisation
and the _people's plan_ his government had
so vigorously pursued.

The UDF response was ambiguous.
While its leaders, particularly of the Congress,
knew full well that much had been
made of the _people's plan_ by the CPI(M),
they did not have a campaign strategy to
expose the many distortions that had crept
into its implementation. Instead, the
focus was on various instances of misuse
of power and pelf to pander to partisan
interests which, in the event, failed to carry
any conviction with the electorate for want
of credible evidence. As for the democratic
decentralisation programme, the
thrust of criticism was on its parentage
rather than on its faulty implementation.
Evidently, the Congress thesis that it was
the late Rajiv Gandhi who initiated the
process of democratic decentralisation in
the country and that the CPI(M) in Kerala
was only playing the constitutional game
and hence could not take credit for implementing.
It did not cut much ice with the
electorate. In retrospect, the UDF leadership
must be ruing the day it decided not
to campaign on the various acts of omission
and commission on the part of the
ruling front in pursuit of the two
programmes which would have brought
much richer dividend in the elections.

Interestingly, what was in focus was,
and still is, not the skewed set-up that came
into being under the _panchayati raj_
programme and the resultant ineffectiveness
of it, as a grassroots administrative
apparatus with easy access to the people
but the subsequent innovation --- the _people's
plan_. The latter was conceived, to quote
its main protagonist, T M Issac Thomas, to
bring about, among other things, "certain
basic attitudinal changes towards the
development process," anda"radical transformation
of the development culture of
the state, which is a necessary requisite for
successful participatory decentralisation".

The rationale was indeed faultless. So
were the intentions. In fact, the protagonists
had also underscored the need not
merely to sustain the new development
culture, but also of institutionalising it
through necessary changes in laws. This,
according to them, would be possible only
if there "is sustained pressure from below,
i.e, of the masses mobilised in the movement
for decentralisation, to secure the
necessary structural changes".

It was not unknown that the transformation
called for a complete break up of the
traditionally well entrenched political and
administrative set-up. This did not appear
to pose an intractable problem because the
CPI(M) was viewed, quite rightly too, as
best suited to bring about the necessary
changes in view of its tremendous clout
with government employees, its mass base
and its proven capacity to mobilise public
opinion and support through allied
organisations like the Sastra Sahitya
Parishad.

As it turned out, the necessary changes
were hard to come by. This is natural
because decentralised governance fragments
and disperses both political and
bureaucratic power. Typically, both the
politician and the bureaucrat abhor this.
Kerala is no exception. Which explains
why the proposal made by the Sen Committee
to downsize the state secretariat
through deployment of staff in the district
and _panchayats_ came to be implemented
only very partly. This has had its baneful
impact as much on the content of the
_people's plan_ as on its execution. One
obvious outcome of this was that the kind
of support systems and expertise envisaged
at the _gram_, _block_ and _district panchayats_
under the _people's plan_ programme
could not be provided. With no expert
guidance of the required nature being
available, the process of grassroots planning
did not get the kind of orientation
envisaged by the protagonists of the
_people's plan_.

This was not wholly unexpected. In fact,
one of the criticisms against the _people's
plan_ was that it was taken up far too soon
without proper devolution of powers and
delineation of authority, both administrative
and operational. Many argued that the
_people's plan_ agenda should have waited
till the process of decentralisation was
taken to the logical end.

The official explanation for clubbing
together both the programmes was that the
perceived handicaps were not insuperable
and that the elected bodies, their officials
and the people could be motivated to
prepare local plans that will reflect the
actual needs and requirements of the people.
The snag, as subsequent events showed,
was that the whole exercise ultimately came
to rest in the hands of people who had
no experience of the planning process.
With no infrastructure or support system
to depend on, _panchayat_ level planning
followed the familiar pattern with a pronounced
bias for welfare measures that
call for no detailed study and hard decisions
but that, all the same, keep the vote
banks happy and contented. Overall, this
has had all the trappings of the model
popularly associated with Kerala.

The only safeguard provided, possibly
to insulate the programmes from criticism,
was in the form of the expert committee
set up at the district level. These committees
were supposed to scrutinise and,
wherever required, vet the developmental
plans prepared by the _gram_/_block panchayats_.
This was not taken kindly to even
by some of the LDF partners, primarily the
Communist Party of India. Their main
objection was that, conceptually, the expert
committee went against the grain of the
_people's plan_ in that a non-elective, quasi-official
body was given the power to
scrutiny, even scuttle, plans and programmes
prepared and passed by the elected
representatives. And, politically, they had
the nagging suspicion that these committees
would be so constituted as to include
only those who would be all too willing
to play to the CPI(M) tune. In sum, they
would be no more than mere appendages
of the CPI(M) at the district level.

Right or wrong, the feeling was widespread.
But independent observers feel
that these expert committees did have a
role which they played quite usefully. They
not only provided some expertise, which
the _gram panchayats_ so woefully lacked,
but also acted as watchdogs against
possible misuse or disuse of plan funds.
Moreover, they were able to bring to bear
on the _gram_ and _block panchayats_ some
discipline in prioritisation of their needs
and allocation of funds.

The base, hence the real power, was
provided by the _gram sabhas_. Within each
_panchayats_, there were several ward-based
_gram sabhas_. There is no denying that in
the initial days, these sabhas had incredible
attendance. But interest in them slowly
waned and attendance became thin. There
were many known cases in which business
transactions could not be conducted for
want of quorum. This, surprisingly, had
been the case even in _panchayats_ which
were the recipients of national and state
awards for being models of the new
developmental pattern.

None of them, however, has had any
money problem as 40 per cent of the plan
fund was transferred to the _panchayats_.
This was in addition to the central and state
allocations for the rural sector. The total
amount transferred to the local bodies since
1996--97, when the programme was
launched, adds up to more than Rs 3,200
crore. To most of the _panchayats_, if not
all, this was a bonanza. Used to measly
allotments of a few lakh, these local bodies
found themselves wallowing in money.
Lacking expertise to make the best use of
the funds, most of them opted for the
conventional route of expenditure. Invariably
the funds were spent not so much on
asset creation as for patronage, largely
political, but partly social.

In the initial years, a good chunk of the
funds was generously used to distribute
cows, sheep, goats and so on. Building
public and private toilets, digging wells
and tanks, providing drinking water facilities,
improving and constructing roads and
bridges figured equally high in the priority
of every _panchayat_. Though no firm figures
are available for sector-wise allocation
and spending, a safe estimate could
be that in the four years the experiment
has been in action till March 2000, nearly
Rs 1,800 crore had been spent on these
counts, which was more than half of the
amount made available to _panchayats_.

The distribution of cows and goats is
reminiscent of the loan mela of the Congress
regime of yesteryears. Mercifully,
the practice was discontinued when its
large-scale abuse came to be known. The
ostensible purpose behind the scheme was to
provide the unskilled, semi-literate or illiterate
people in the rural areas with some
means of livelihood. This was not to be, as
the beneficiaries kept the animals for some
time and later disposed them of for a price.

The real damage lay elsewhere. The
selection of beneficiaries, more often than
not, smacked of partisan politics in that
they were picked on political consideration.
Predictably, the non-beneficiaries,
who were substantial, were not merely
upset but were disillusioned with the whole
process and hence distanced themselves
from everything including, primarily,
attending the _gram sabhas_.

This is not to suggest that the money
spent on such measures and safe drinking
water, schools, roads and bridges was a
waste. Far from it, the point of criticism
is that too much money and attention
seemed to have been bestowed on them
than had been warranted by the ground
realities. And in the overall ambience,
competitive welfarism got precedence over
hard-nosed decision-making.

With decentralisation and _people's plan_,
the local bodies were burdened with too
much of money which they were ill-equipped
to make good use of. _Panchayats_
that had hitherto been strapped for funds,
suddenly found themselves flush with
money given without any pre-conditions.
In the first year (1996--97), therefore, they
could not use the allotted fund (Rs 212
crore) despite being overly charitable with
the allocations. This did not prevent the
state government from increasing the
allotment to Rs 749 crore in the following
year and to Rs 950 crore in 1998--99, The
last year of the century (1999--2000) saw
the allotment touching Rs 1,020 crore.

A clear picture of how well the money
had been spent would have been available
had there been a performance assessment
by an independent body. Nothing of the
kind has so far been undertaken. Some
_panchayats_ seemed to have undertaken
on their own some kind of performance
auditing, evidently by their own personnel.
In some others the _gram sabhas_ have taken
upon themselves the task of reviewing
schemes approved by them. Neither satisfies
the principles of accountability.

This absence of accountability is to be
expected because money comes rather
easily. Normally, organisations will be less
accountable in terms of how they expend
their resources, the mobilisation of which
is not their responsibility. And those who
run these organisations will also tend to
be charitable with such money. The
_panchayats_ in Kerala were only living up
to this well known tendency.

Admittedly, the experiment has not been
an unmitigated failure. For all its perceived
shortcomings, it did have its share of
achievements. There have been innumerable
_panchayats_ that have taken the experiment
quite seriously and brought about
precisely the kind of sea-change envisaged
under the _people's plan_. These success
stories have been the handiwork of individuals
at the helm of these _panchayats_.
And in the majority of cases the movements
initiated by them had cut across the
familiar political, social and economic
divide. In its early stage, this was precisely
what the visionary EMS Namboodiripad
had envisioned under the Kerala model of
decentralisation. He was a firm believer
in decentralised governance. But he knew
this would be hard to come by so long as
elections to the local bodies were on fragmented
party lines. Hence, his plea for
party-less election which, unfortunately, had
no takers among political parties, including
his own.

There are several lessons to be learnt
from these successful _panchayats_, most of
which had been the recipients of central
and state awards for their outstanding performance
in fulfilling the targets fixed under
the _people's plan_. Since 1996--97, as many
as 135 _panchayats_ have been the recipients
of such awards. Barring two _panchayats_
(Mundathikode in Thrissur district and
Kunnathunadu in Emakulam district), all
of these were under LDF control. But in
the latest elections, however, LDF lost
control of as many as 28 of these _panchayats_,
some of them their strongholds,
to the UDF. To this we will come later.

As mentioned earlier, in all these cases,
it was the individual initiative of the respective
_panchayat_ presidents and other
office-bearers that made all the difference.
A typical case in point is that of the
Mattathur _panchayat_ in Thrissur district.
Social activists had been active here well
before the introduction of the _people's
plan_. Incidentally, the first liquor-free
village in the country, Onody, is in this
_panchayat_ and it attained the status as back
as 1979. Though CPI(M) controlled, the
_panchayat_ never allowed its programmes
to be influenced by narrow party considerations.
Decisions were taken collectively
by all members belonging to both the fronts.
The emphasis was on programmes that
benefited the largest number of people
rather than individuals or groups. While
health, education, sanitation and civic
amenities did get attention, the focus was
on asset creation, unlike in many other
_panchayats_. This was achieved through
two groups, the _neighbourhood group_ and
_self-help group_.

The _neighbourhood groups_, numbering
206, consisting mostly of men, were involved
in developmental activities, including
identifying projects, target groups,
overseeing works and so on. They also
brokered disputes, whether family or caste
or religious. The _self-help groups_ comprising
women concentrated on developing
skills among themselves and providing
support, including financial, to set up small
units, mostly in their households. There
were over 200 such groups with active
membership of over 2,000 women in the
_panchayat_. Besides, developing skills, the
group arranged bank loans with each family
being eligible for as much as Rs 50,000.
And the items produced by the household
units included essential products with a
ready market within the village and its
surroundings.

The experience of other award-winning
_panchayats_ was not vastly different. The
only difference perhaps was in the selection
of sectors that offered potential for
development. In some cases, the focus was
on vegetable cultivation, while in others
it was skill-based small industries.

A far more impressive story was that of
the Manjeri municipality in the backward,
Muslim-dominated Malappuram district in
north Kerala. The Manjeri experience, as
it has come to be described, exposes many
myths, including that development of skill-based
small-scale and medium-scale industries
is beyond the capability of the
civic bodies. This traditionally backward
area with no industrial culture to boost is
today a booming hosiery manufacturing
centre. No less importantly, the experiment-encompasses
not merely skills development
and employment generation but
empowerment of women in what is hitherto
considered a socially backward area.
In fact, it is a fascinating story of transformation
in which social groups, municipal
authorities and bankers joined hands
to bring about a small socio-economic
revolution in the overall ambience of
decentralisation and _people's plan_.

Though these successes were largely in
CPI(M)-controlled _panchayats_, the party
did not gain any political benefit as its
defeats in most of them in the recently held
local bodies' elections proved. One facile
theory is that the party suffered at the
hustings because the non-beneficiaries who
formed the majority turned against it.
Another theory is that the party's fortunes
were undermined by the groupism that had
raised its head in recent times. The open
warfare between the leaderships of the party
and that of its labour wing --- CITU --- is said
to have contributed hugely to the debacle.

All this does not seem to convey the
whole story. The one curious factor was
the denial of party tickets to almost all
those who had worked tirelessly for the
success of the _people's plan_. In a majority
of cases, tickets were denied to those who
refused to play to the party's diktat, particularly
in the matter of the distribution
of patronage. The fact that they were precisely
the people who made a success of
the programme and who brought laurels
as much to the experiment as to the party
was of no consequence. Some rebelled and
fought the elections as independents but
had to face the party's censure. The loss
to the party was even greater.

Was the party's involvement as total as
had been made out was, and still is, a
question often asked even by those sympathetically
disposed towards it. Barring
EMS Namboodiripad, none of top leaders
in the party was seen committed to the
decentralisation programme, much less to
the _people's plan_. The burden of carrying
them through rested on those who had
neither any weighty clout within the party
nor a strong constituency to flaunt. This
and the total failure to rope in other political
parties and social organisations proved
to be a major undoing of the experiment.

This was quite unlike the literacy movement
in which the party put its weight
behind it to enormous advantage. Whether
the lack of interest in the latest case is a
fall-out of the struggle between the centrifugal
and centripetal forces within the
party is anybody's guess.

Certainly, the euphoria so palpable at the
beginning is missing. Even the vocal
advocates of the programme in the CPI(M)
are ominously silent. Which indeed
raises doubts about the future of the
two programmes even as the two fronts
get ready for the crucial elections to the
assembly.
