_The government's version of the burning of Chrar-e-Sharief and the
events leading up to it are full of holes, but more important is it that
the destruction of the shrine has dealt a blow to the efforts of Kashmiri
leaders such as Shabir Shah and Yasin Malik who have been working
courageously to bring the gun under political control in Kashmir._

\ 

The burning down of the shrine of Sheikh
Noor-ud-din Noorani, regarded as the patron
saint of all Kashmiris, in the early hours of
May 11 confirms the worst fears about the
evil consequences of a military response to
the democratic aspirations of a people. Just
as Operation Bluestar took place on Guru
Arjun Dev's anniversary, Id-ul-Zoha became
the day for the burning of Chrar-e-Sharief.
On May 8, two days before the shrine was
destroyed, about a thousand buildings
around the shrine were burnt to cinders.
Since journalists and other observers have
not been allowed anywhere close to the
shrine after March, there is no independent
confirmation of the death toll or even about
the allegation that the militants had planted
explosives in and near the shrine. The fact
that Kashmiri leaders such as Yasin Malik
of the JKLF and Shabir Shah and Abdul
Ghani Lone of the Hurriyat Conference
were stopped and arrested and journalists
disallowed from visiting the shrine to see
the damage caused by the fire on May 8
strengthened the apprehension that security
forces were anticipating if not preparing the
ground for some action.

As expected, the government, after initial
fumbling about the sequence of events
leading upto shrine's destruction, has blamed
'Pakistan-trained mercenaries'. The minister
of state for internal security, Rajesh Pilot,
upped the _ante_. by warning Pakistan that "we
shall have no option but to accomplish the
unfinished task" --- threatening to declare
war, in other words. This sabre-rattling
appears to be an attempt at deflecting public
attention by building up anti-Pakistan
hysteria. Official statements, accepted
unquestioningly by the media and political
commentators, are full of holes. Officials
claim that the army did not move towards
the shrine or return fire until after the militants
had burned down the shrine. They add that
no more than 10 militants were killed in the
"gun battle when troops foiled the
mercenaries' bid to escape". Officials argue
that the militants and 'their masters' wanted
to upset the speedy improvement in the
situation in Kashmir, especially the government's
efforts to reintroduce democratic
processes through elections. However,
police sources have stated (_The Tribune_,
May 12) that the army had come under
heavy fire by 11:30pm on May 10 and
major exchange of fire had taken place
between the two sides when "the soldiers
had started moving forward to prevent
foreign mercenaries from blowing up the
shrine". This lends some credence to the
militants' claim that the army had advanced
towards the shrine and fired mortar
shells and that 32 militants in all had been
killed.

The other claim of the officials --- that
militants had burned the 1,000 buildings on
May 8 to intimidate the local population ---
is even more incredible. It makes no sense
for the militants to clear the area surrounding
the shrine when they were running out of
ammunition. The buildings obstructed the
armed forces and to that extent protected the
militants. The militants would certainly not
have wanted to give the army a clear range
and offer themselves as sitting ducks. Indeed
the May 8 arson, according to residents of
Chrar-e-Sharief (_The Hindustan Times_,
May 9) was caused by the army firing
mortars. The fact that the tire brigade could
enter the area and douse the fire close to
the shrine also raises doubts about allegations
that the militants had planted land
mines, explosives, etc. Let us also remember
that in the early days when journalists still
had access to the area no such allegations
had been levelled. These charges began to
be made only after the authorities clamped
down on the journalists' access to Chrar-e-Sharief.

Whether the May 8 fire which cleared the
shrine of the surrounding 'obstructions' was
intentional or not, the fact remains that for
the first time Indian security forces had the
shrine within the unobstructed range of their
firearms, The 50--60 militants inside the shrine
did not pose much of a problem for the
Indian administration and there was no
pressing need to engage in retaliatory strikes,
especially if it were true, as the government
claims, that the militants had laid explosives
in the shrine. In any case, it was common
knowledge that any direct hit on the shrine
by the security forces, even minus explosives,
carried the risk of the more than 500-years-old
wooden shrine catching fire. Therefore,
the decision to attack or even retaliate must
have been cleared by the highest government
authority.

# NO ENQUIRY

The militants cannot escape blame for
taking shelter in the precincts of the shrine.
But then it has to be remembered that it is
the Indian government's repression let loose
by the then governor Jagmohan which is the
principal cause for thousands of Kashmiris
taking up arms. The present governor is on
record that in December 1989 there were 36
companies of security forces fighting 300
militants. By March 1993 there were 300
companies of the security forces and one
division of the army fighting 10,000 militants
with another 5,000 across the border. This
was after 2,000 militants had been killed and
10,000 apprehended. Kashmiri youth began
going across the border in large numbers
only after March--April 1990. And now there
are approximately half a million men of the
army, the so-called Rashtriya Rifles and the
para-military forces controlling Indian-held
Kashmir and fighting an unspecified number
of militants --- after having killed more than
4,000 and arrested nearly 20,000.

It may be suggested that the destruction
of the shrine was the result of an accident
or a decision taken by local commanders.
However, this is very unlikely, considering
the politically sensitive nature of the shrine
with its emotional and religious appeal. Also,
the handling of the siege of the Hazratbal
shrine showed that the prime minister's
office (PMO) is directly involved in even
decisions on day-to-day matters. What is
more, with the formation of the department
of Kashmir affairs under the charge of the
PMO, it is doubtful if any local commander
could operate at Chrar-e-Sharief without a
clear brief. In other words, the possibility
of the destruction of the holy shrine must
have been taken into consideration by the
highest political authority. Decision-makers
may have calculated on a muted response
to the destruction of the shrine from those
quarters in Islam which have frowned on
worship at the shrine of the Sufi saint. The
Indian high commissioner in UK went so
far as to claim in an interview with the BBC
on May 11 that fundamentalists had
destroyed the shrine since they regarded it
as a 'Hindu' structure.

On May 9, the day before the destruction
of Chrar-e-Sharief: the right and left in
parliament unitedly condemned the
government for 'kneeling' before the
militants. Not a word was said about the
Kashmiri people's alienation and the
violence perpetrated against then. Indeed
there was not even the usual vacuous talk
of the political process. And on May 11,
barring the CPI(M), all the parties in parliament
blamed the 'mercenaries' for the
destruction. No one bothered to examine the
official claims or worried that the events in
Chrar had gravely undermined the efforts of
Kashmiri leaders such as Shabir Shah, Yasin
Malik and others who had worked
courageously to bring the gun under political
control. It is a double defeat for them
because for the first time in six years they
had begun to reach out to the Indian public.
The destruction of the shrine is a victory for
hardliners on both sides.

The prime minister has ruled out a judicial
inquiry into the destruction of Chrar-e-Sharief on the ground that it was an "operational
matter" and these are "never made the
subject of judicial inquiries". This was hardly
surprising, though the government has
insisted that the blame for burning of Chrar
town and the shrine lay with the Pakistan-backed mercenaries and that the government
had irrefutable evidence to that effect. Once
again, there was no protest in parliament
over the rejection of the demand for an
independent probe. The MPs only chastised
the government, for failing to foil the
alleged conspiracy of the Pakistan-backed
mercenaries to destroy the shrine. The 22-member
all-party delegation of MPs which
visited Chrar and was confronted by the
victims of the fire who shouted slogans
against the Indian army whom they blamed
for burning the shrine, had nothing to say
to assuage the people's sense of hurt. Indeed
a few days earlier CPI leader Indarjit Gupta
had deprecated reports in a section of the
press that, according to him, 'maligned' the
army by blaming it for the destruction of the
shrine. He advised the press to exercise
'restraint' in such matters.

On March 31 some 25 journalists had been
attacked and beaten up by the CRPF in
Jammu when the Jammu Press Association
took out a peaceful procession from
Residency Road to the state secretariat to
protest against interference by police and
security forces in the day-to-day functioning
of newspersons. Neither the Press Council
nor the Editors' Guild was moved to protest
against the attack. Two weeks before this
incident, on March 17, restrictions had been
placed on the entry of journalists and
'outsiders' into Chrar. This was done after
the army moved in and took positions
around Chrar-e-Shariet. Between then and
the May 8 arson which destroyed a large
number of buildings around the shrine, the
Indian media did not once protest against
the restrictions placed on the press in
Kashmir.

Throughout the period of the siege of
Chrar-e-Sharief, BJP MPs routinely
accused the government of adopting a soft
policy _vis-a-vis_ the 'mercenaries'. On
March 20 the BJP said that concern for the
safety of the shrine should not be made an
excuse for inaction. They demanded that
security forces be given a free hand to deal
with the militants.

# DISCREPANCIES IN OFFICIAL CLAIMS

As early as on February 24 the army chief
had told the press at Pune that "nearly 100
militants" had taken shelter in Chrar-e-Sharief. But he hastened to add that the
number of militants was no more than a
guess. On March 11 general J S Dhillon
told reporters in Srinagar that "for the capture
of 30 to 40 militants there in the town we
cannot risk the life and property of people".
This was later confirmed after the burning
of the shrine hy the local commander at
Chrar-e-Sharief. brigadier Mohinder Singh,
who told BBC on March 12 that there were
no more than 35 militants in Chrar-e-Sharief.
Yet officials and the media have quoted
fanciful figures of anywhere between 100
and 500 militants holed up in Chrar-e-Sharief. When no more than 32 are said to
have been killed by the security forces, no
one seems to know what has happened to
the rest of the militants. Of the 14 bodies
shown to the press, five turned out to he
those of local residents, even though the
army commander had claimed that there had
been no civilian casualties (_Business
Standard_, May 13).

Even on the presence of foreign militants
in Chrar, there have been discrepancies in
official statements. The army commander in
Chrar has said that these were from Pakistan-held Kashmir and Pakistan and that there
were none from Afghanistan (_The Times of
India_, May 13). The same day the union
home ministry stated that "there were in all
seven confirmed foreign mercenaries ...
Mast Gul ... is an Afghan national ... another
was a Sudanese mercenary" (_Asian Age_,
May 13).

General J S Dhillon, corps commander,
told correspondents on May 12, "we had
envisaged that after the winter the militants
would come out of the shrine. When at the
end of March we found no sign of their
coming out, troops were called to patrol the
outskirts of the town". He also claimed that
the army neither laid siege to the town nor
moved into the town until May 11 morning
after the shrine was burnt down (_The
Tribune_, May 13). But this is contradicted
by other reports. The army had moved in
and taken positions around Chrar by March
8 and from then on there were reports of
regular exchange of fire. This would suggest
a decision to engage the militants in
intermittent gun battle to test their resolve
and make whatever advance was possible to
gain advantage. There had been heavy
exchange of fire between the two sides
between March 23 and 28 which had caused
panic among the people (_Asian Age_,
March 30). This situation continued until
April 22 when, according to the police, the
army succeeded in taking up positions on
two hills, Natul Teng and Dekhin Bal, inside
Chrar town. This brought them within 800
metres of the shrine. On April 23 a police
constable was killed when the army opened
fire on a police bus coming from Chrar
(_The Times of India_, April 25). On April 26
an army spokesperson claimed that Mast
Gul had told the local SHO that he would
blow up the shrine. The SP of Badgam
protested against the army claim and
expressed the fear that such claims
could result in the SHO being killed. On
April 27 Bhuvanesh Chaturvedi, minister of
state in the PMO, in a written reply to BJP's
K L Sharma said that the government would
consider flushing out militants and foreign
mercenaries holed up inside Chrar-e-Sharief
and confirmed that there had been intermittent
exchange of fire between the two sides.
The UN Human Rights Commissioner
lamented after the destruction of the shrine
that the government had failed to protect the
shrine despite the assurance given to him.
What all this suggests is that the army had
been preparing for action. The prime minister
said on May 12 that the state administration
and the security forces on the spot had been
"given full authority" to deal with the
situation in Chrar-e-Sharief.

Fire brigade personnel have accused the
army of having ordered them to remain
inside throughout the night May 10--11,
warning them of dire consequences were
they to attempt to douse the fire. Earlier,
on May 8, fire tenders had been allowed 10
put out only fires close to the shrine. The
police say that there was heavy firing by
11--11:30 pm on May 10 when the army
began moving towards the shrine. A report
by the correspondent of _The Tribune_
(May 12) cites local police as saying that
by 11.30pm on May 10 "a major exchange
of fire took place between the militants and
the troops. After three hours of crossfire ...
in which UMGs and LMGs were also used,
the shrine of the Sufi saint was seen in
flames". Former governor Girish Saxena
made an oblique criticism of the army's
moves in a recent interview: "As it is 25 odd
militants are killed every week, and more
than that number arc captured. There is.
therefore, no great advantage in killing a
dozen or two dozen ultras in a place of
worship. The administration generally
avoids a showdown at a shrine or any
other densely populated place where it could
be placed at a disadvantage politically or
psychologically" (_The Hindustan Times_,
May 21).

The initial efforts to shift the blame on
to Pakistan and the bombast of government
spokespersons warning Pakistan and even
threatening war have come to nought. That
the government has not been able to provide
any evidence of Pakistan's role in the
destruction of the shrine and that it has not
lodged a formal protest with the Pakistan
government through diplomatic channels
makes it clear that its extravagant accusations
were meant for domestic consumption. To
divert attention once again the prime minister
has been harping on the government's resolve
to hold elections in Kashmir, He also said
in parliament on May 16 that the government
would "consider" anything short of "_azadi_"
within the framework of the Constitution in
Kashmir. The BJP promptly warned that
"conferring autonomy on the state would
give a fillip to fissiparous and centrifugal
forces all over the country".

This shadow-boxing between the Congress
and the BJP will continue to divert
attention from the real issues and tasks in
Kashmir.
