Worker-ownership enthusiasts often consider
Mondragon almost the "holy grail" of cooperative
enterprise development. Few businesses, though,
are immune to the global economy's demands, and
the Mondragon co-ops certainly are not.

The Mondragon group has responded to these
pressures in several ways, the most significant
response being legal-structural unification. In the
past, the individual cooperatives were fairly
autonomous in business terms, although they were
affiliated in a number of important ways. The new
structure, by contrast, gathers all the enterprises
and support organizations under one corporate
roof, the Mondragon Cooperative Corporation
(_MCC_). The cooperatives are distributed among
the _MCC_'s three main business divisions
(Financial, Industrial and Retail/Distribution) and
seven subdivisions. The _MCC_ as a whole is now
managed by a President and his or her General
Council, comprised of the division and
subdivision Vice Presidents and several others.
_MCC_ officials emphasize that the purpose of the
reorganization is _not_ centralized operational
control, but rather closer 'Coordination of activities
within business sectors, greater economies of
scale, and strengthened strategic planning'.

These new management bodies are
accountable to two representative governance
structures, the Cooperative Congress and its
Standing Committee. The Cooperative Congress is
made up of representatives elected from each
cooperative in the Corporation and is the highest
authority in the _MCC_. The Congress elects 17
people to the Standing Committee (essentially an
internal board of directors) which appoints the
President of the _MCC_ (the CEO) and must approve the President's choices for General Council.

All but three or four of the group's co-ops
voted to join the _MCC_. Still, the new structures
have generated a substantial amount of controversy
within the group over issues such as the
centralization of authority, and the bureaucratic
distancing of management from the membership.

In addition to the restructuring, over the last
several years the _MCC_ has begun to make use of
several other potentially controversial strategies
aimed at increasing competitiveness. It has
acquired or carried out mergers or joint ventures
with conventional firms and built several plants
in low-wage, developing countries. The future
membership status of employees in many of these
enterprises has not been resolved. Many
cooperatives in the _MCC_ use temporary workers in
periods of high demand and the proportion of
temps is also a concern. Further, the _MCC_ is now,
indirectly, selling a form of non-voting stock on
the public market, hence, at some level, mixing
worker-members' voices with those of capital
investors. Finally, the wage solidarity ratio may be
significantly altered group-wide, and already has
been in some part of the Corporation, from 4.5:1 to
6:1 or higher.

Change in the face of ever-increasing global
competition is inevitable. Proponents of the new
arrangements in the _MCC_ argue that they are
necessary to survive this competition. But the jury
is still out on both economic and social questions
in Mondragon. While the _MCC_ remains an
exemplar of democratic worker ownership, it
remains to be seen whether the new policies can
both bring greater business success and maintain
the group's explicit commitment to the principles
and practices of cooperative enterprise.
