_Given universal adult suffrage and democratic decentralisation in the form of punchayati raj, some
degree of politics seems to be inherent in the co-operative structure._

_Although excessive political involvement may hamper the growth of co-operatives us economic institutions,
within certain limits such involvement may not be dysfunctional. Besides, co-operatives perform
certain latent political functions which are significant from the point of view of the political development
of a democratic society._

_The analysis attempted here of the nature of political involvement of co-operatives and its implications
for both the co-operatives and the wider political system is largely based on the author's empirical
observations drawn from rural Maharashtra._

\ 

It is a matter of common observation
that India has, since Independence,
become highly politicised. Many new
groups have now entered the political
arena, and the intensity of their participation
in the political process has also
increased. As a result of changes in the
nature of the polity, the style of politics
has also changed. These changes are
attributed to such factors as the adoption
of a democratic constitution based
on adult suffrage and the democratic
decentralisation in the form of _panchayati
raj_. Many groups and their organisations
are making demands
on the political system, and this
influences the strategies of different
political parties. Caste associations, religious
communities, language groups,
student organisations, business groups,
trade unions and co-operatives all are
actively and increasingly involved in
politics in one way or another. While
the nature of political involvement of
some of these groups has been studied
to some extent, the co-operatives have
not so far received adequate attention.
The purpose of this paper is to analyse
the nature of political involvement of
co-operatives and its implications for
both the co-operatives and the wider
political system. It may be stated at
the outset that most of my empirical
observations are drawn from rural
Maharashtra.[^/1]

# WIDESPREAD APPREHENSION

Most of the writings on the co-operative
movement, including those of cooperators
themselves, tend to condemn
the involvement of co-operatives in
politics. One of the exceptions to this
general tendency is Fred Longden, who
forcefully argues that the co-operatives
should play an active role in politics.
For the same reason he regrets the
decline of the Co-operative Party in
England.[^/2] Right from the classics of
co-operation, such as "Consumers' Cooperation
in Great Britain"[^/3], to the
popular Indian text-books on the subject,
such as "Theory and Practice of
Co-operation in India and Abroad",[^/4]
a plea is made for keeping co-operatives
aloof from politics. Not only that but
it is discussed as one of the accepted
'principles' of co-operation. "Political
neutrality is a co-operative principle",[^/5]
it is often stated. It is argued that a
co-operative society is basically an
economic organisation based upon the
ideas of mutual aid, loyalty to the
institution and unity among the
members. Politics, by its very nature,
implies a certain degree of divisiveness
and conflict. Hence, the argument goes,
it is in the interest of the movement
to keep the co-operatives and politics
separate.

Eminent co-operators, students of the
movement and even politicians appear
to share this view. They also seem to
imply that any involvement of co-operatives
in politics is harmful to the healthy
growth of the movement. Thorner has
reported that "in several States the
leadership of the co-operatives is heavily
sprinkled with active politicians". He
found so many MLAs controlling the
co-operatives that he has termed this
conditions as "emmelitis" (afflicted by
MLAs). He further warns that the co-operatives
may become 'political footballs'
in this process.[^/6] Gadgil has noted
with anxiety the interest exhibited by
party politicians in the conduct of
sugar co-operatives in Maharashtra. He
also disapproves of party gatherings in
the premises of a co-operative society.[^/7]
What is even more noteworthy is that
the politicians themselves condemn this
tendency. Inaugurating the Fifth Indian
Co-operative Congress recently, Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi suggested that
the Congress should also consider
"how to depoliticalise" the co-operative
movement, as there was a "widespread
feeling that co-operatives were too much
mixed up with politics".[^/8] Not Very
long ago, the then Union Food and
Agriculture Minister, C Subramaniam,
described the way in which politics had
'made inroads into the affairs of co-operatives
and how the co-operatives had
become hotbeds of political strife.[^/9]
Addressing the Maharashtra Congress
Legislature Party after the recent
General Elections, the Union Home
Minister, Y B Chavan, noted with
regret that the co-operatives in Maharashtra,
particularly the sugar co-operatives,
had become arenas of political
rivalry. He warned party members
that such a situation was fraught with
danger for social and economic development
of the State.[^/10]

# GROWTH AFTER INDEPENDENCE

The association between co-operatives
on the one hand and politicians and
political parties on the other has increased
significantly after Independence.
(In this paper, politicians would usually
mean party politicians.) Broadly speaking,
the following factors seem to have
contributed to this development: the
policy of alien rulers to discourage
emergence of spontaneous leadership in
the co-operative field, the reluctance
on the part of the pre-Independence
politicians to actively participate in the
co-operative movement, the increase in
the scope and scale of the movement,
and the demands of democratic politics
since Independence.

Firstly, under colonial rule, as pointed
out by Gadgil, initiative in co-operative
work was almost invariably taken by
the Government and its officials. The
alien rulers tended to discourage emergence
of spontaneous leadership in
potentially powerful co-operative organisations.
Such a leadership, they
feared, would pose a challenge to their
own rule,[^/11] Leaders with nationalist
leanings and associated with political
activities were, therefore, "looked down
upon by the alien government in entrusting
any such work".[^/12] The non-official
leadership in co-operatives consisted
largely of loyalists or who were
not opposed, at least not militantly
opposed to colonial rule. Any work in
the co-operatives requires a degree of
collaboration with the government. In
the days of the anti-British struggle,
politicians in general did not favour
such a 'collaborationist' role. They also
found co-operative work highly limited
in political effectiveness.[^/13] A leading cooperator
has noted that "there was no
place for co-operatives in Gandhiji's
constructive programme ... It was only
after Independence that the co-operative
movement received full popular support".[^/14]
This is, by and large, applicable
to British India, although spontaneous
co-operative leadership seems to have
been encouraged by some of the former
princely states such as Baroda.

Another factor contributing to this
development was the limited scope and
scale of the co-operative movement before
Independence. Although co-operation
was introduced as far back as in
1904 with the promulgation of the
Co-operative Societies Act, it was confined
mainly to agricultural credit for
quite some time. Even in this limited
sphere, it did not make much progress
except in the former provinces of Bombay
and Madras. Its expansion in other
spheres was slow and limited. The
picture has changed significantly during
the last two decades. The number of
co-operatives and their membership and
capital have grown several times. Cooperative
activity has also been extended
significantly to several spheres such
as marketing, processing, farming, banking
and housing. Co-operatives now
deal with the interests of millions of
people, handle vast amounts of money
and command enormous resources. As
a result, politicians and political parties
find it politically advantageous to work
in them.

Lastly, the demands of democratic
politics since Independence have also
contributed to this development. The
adoption of a democratic constitution
based upon adult suffrage and the
programme of _panchayati raj_ have significantly
changed the style of politics,
at least in the rural areas. A politician,
in order to get elected, has to build a
following for himself. For this purpose
he tries to strengthen the traditional
networks of relationships based on caste,
kinship and village loyalties, as well as
establish new networks of relationships
based on distribution of loans, jobs and
other forms of patronage. This is done
through his control over the local co-operative
and _panchayat_ institutions.
Post-Independence politics, thus, induces
politicians to take active interest in the
work of the co-operatives.

# DEGREES OF INVOLVEMENT

Co-operatives differ in the degree of
their involvement in politics, and they
could be placed on a continuum on the
basis of this criterion. At one end of
the continuum there are co-operatives
which are neither identified with any
particular political party, nor do they
have among their leaders any party
politicians. One would of course notice
politics in such co-operatives in the
sense of a struggle for power among the
leaders to secure control over them.
At the other end of the continuum there
are co-operatives which are openly
identified with particular political parties
or factions within them. The struggle
for power among the leaders of
these co-operatives also reflects the
rivalry among competing political
parties or factions within a party. In
such cases the roles of co-operative
leaders and party politicians are merged.
In between these two extremes, there
are co-operatives controlled by party
politicians but not openly identified
with any particular party. The leaders
perform dual roles of co-operators and
party politicians. The struggle for power
in these co-operatives may be intensified
as a result of divisions among the
leaders on political lines and due to
competition between them in other
spheres.

While describing the nature of political
involvement of co-operatives, the
following questions will be discussed:
Firstly, why is there an intense struggle
for power over the control of some of
the co-operatives? Secondly, how do
politicians occupy important positions
in many of them? And thirdly, why do
political parties or factions take keen
interest in the affairs of co-operatives?
To understand the nature of political
involvement of co-operatives, it would
be profitable to examine these questions.

The affairs of many co-operatives are
characterised by competition between
rival personalities and factions to gain
control over their management. This is
true not only of the bigger and more
important co-operatives, such as the
district central banks, sugar factories,
and sale and purchase unions, but also
of smaller societies at the village level,
In villages this often leads to the
establishment of more than one society
performing the same functions. The
struggle for acquiring control over a
co-operative becomes intense particularly
during the election of its managing
committee. The rival contenders for
power resort to various means to win
over the voters. Intense and often bitter
campaigning goes on. Various pressures
are used to influence the voters, and
a lot of money is spent and other
resources are exploited to capture a
co-operative. This is more so in the
case of bigger co-operatives. In certain
parts of Maharashtra, candidates, for
directorships of co-operative sugar factories
and banks spend from three to
five thousand rupees each. Sometimes
the technique of 'kidnapping' the 'key'
voters is employed to ensure the election
of a particular candidate as director
or chairman. In an area where there
are a large number of co-operatives,
people always appear to be preparing
for one election or another, making the
rivalry between contenders for power
perpetual and all-pervading.

A certain degree of competition and
rivalry seems to be inherent in the
structure of co-operatives organised on
democratic lines. The co-operative movement,
almost from its beginning, has
adopted the democratic method of functioning.
Since all members are equals as
voters and equally entitled to contest for
an office, the competition for power
seems to be normal, if not inevitable.
The keenness shown by members in the
elections is generally a reflection of their
interest in the co-operative and its affairs
and of their willingness to participate
in its working. It indicates at least that
they are not indifferent towards it. This
is of special significance for the growth
of the movement. Ostergaard and
Halsey have reported that many co-operatives
in England face 'a problem
of apathy' on the part of their members.
This is indicated by poor attendance
(0.5 per cent) at the business
meetings and poor voting (1.65 percent)
in the elections to the managing
committees.[^/15] In contrast to this, more
than 50 per cent of members attends
the general body meetings and over
95 per cent vote in the elections of
co-operative sugar factories, sale and
purchase unions, banks and other co-operatives
in Ahmednagar district of
Maharashtra. This is evidence of greater
awareness and desire for participation
on the part of the members. Of course,
there are variations between different
regions of the State and between different
types of co-operatives in this regard.
Generally speaking, those co-operatives
which are vital for the economic
life of the members are characterised
by greater degree of participation
and consequently by greater
competition for control over them.

The leaders invest a lot of money,
time and energy in order to get elected
to important positions in the co-operatives.
The control of a co-operative
ensures economic interests of leaders
and provides for other material gains,
But this is not all, It also confers
prestige and provides access to patronage
and power. The leadership of a
co-operative enhances one's prestige in
the eyes of the local people and one's
influence in the local bureaucracy. It
also makes it possible to distribute
patronage in the form of loans, contracts
and jobs. The control of a co-operative
confers power in the sense
that it enables leaders to take important
decisions affecting the interests of
a large number of people. It is no
surprise that some of the political
leaders find chairmanship of a sugar
co-operative or a co-operative bank
more attractive than membership of a
legislature. The co-operatives, along
with the _panchayati raj_ institutions,
have emerged as new centres of power.
The control of these centres provides
an opportunity for advancement of
ambitious individuals. In a sense,
leadership of co-operatives provides a
new avenue to mobility. This is particularly
significant in a society in which
other avenues to mobility are limited.
As a result of all these factors, the
new centres of power have become
arenas of political rivalry.

Politicians occupy key positions in
many co-operatives. After the recent
General Elections, a Marathi weekly
published with pride a long list of
newly elected MLAs and MPs in the
State who were prominent in the co-operative
field.[^/16] Most of the politicians
in rural Maharashtra, particularly those
belonging to the Congress Party, are
intimately associated with co-operatives
in their respective districts. The President
of the Maharashtra Pradesh Congress
Committee (MPCC) is the Chairman
of both the State Co-operative Bank
and the State Federation of Co-operative
Sugar Factories, besides being closely
associated with several important co-operative
ventures in his own district.
A Minister of State at the Centre owes
his position mainly to his close association
with a leading sugar factory and
other co-operatives in his district. Several
ministers in the State Cabinet have occupied
top positions in co-operative
sugar factories, banks, and other institutions.
Normally, politicians give up
formal positions in co-operatives after
they become ministers, but a Deputy
Minister was persuaded recently to continue
as the Chairman of a sugar factory
'in the interests of the institution'.
The President of the Ahmednagar Zilla
Parishad is the Chairman of a sugar
factory besides being a member of
managing committees of a number of
co-operatives from the village to the national
levels. The office-bearers of the
Congress Party units at the _taluka_ and
district levels are similarly connected
with many co-operatives. Many such
examples could be cited from other
districts of the State and from other
States as well.

# TWO-WAY TRAFFIC

The important question is, how did
politicians come to occupy these positions,
and how do they continue to do
so? Since Independence, due to the
forces described earlier, there has been
operating a 'two-way traffic' between
co-operators and politicians. The erstwhile
'Freedom Fighters' who remained
aloof from the co-operative field have
become co-operators, the co-operators
who avoided party politics have now
become politicians. The old co-operators
no longer face a conflict of loyalties.
They are not required to choose
between collaborating with the alien
government and opposing it by participating
in the national movement.
Many such co-operators have now
made an easy entry into party politics.
They have been welcomed by the
political parties largely because of their
hold over the people in the region
through their work in the co-operative
field. Those who did not enter into
active party politics were soon ousted
or made ineffective by the entry of
active politicians into the field.

With the expansion of the co-operative
sector and the vital role assigned
to it in the government's planning for
economic development, politicians
realised the importance of controlling
these new centres of power. The new
centres provide them with reliable and
durable bases for building up their
following in the area through the distribution
of favours and patronage.
Moreover, control over co-operatives
helps them to secure control over
_panchayat_ bodies, educational institutions,
and party organisation, and facilitates
their entry into legislatures. Thus,
controlling co-operatives means dominating
the political system in general,
at least at the local level. As one cooperator
and Congress leader said,
"you can't understand local politics
without understanding the local co-operatives,
and vice versa". The politics
of certain areas is largely influenced by
the politics of local co-operatives.

A politician, in order to acquire
power, needs both resources and skills.
Participation in co-operatives and the
constant efforts required to retain control
over them help him to improve
his political skills. What is more important,
co-operatives provide the
necessary but scarce resources, both
human and material, for his political
activities. This is particularly evident
during elections. In the last General
Elections, there were many reports in
local papers about the use of vehicles
and other resources of co-operatives in
the campaigns of many candidates in
different parts of Maharashtra. In 1962,
an Assembly candidate in Ahmednagar
district not only used the resources,
including the vehicles and employees, of
the co-operatives under his control, but
many co-operative societies in the area
contributed to his election fund.

Co-operative leaders often feel that to
be a politician is an advantage even
in managing the co-operatives. Apart
from some special skills which such a
person usually acquires, a politician has
relatively easy access to the men in
power and authority, which makes him
more effective as a leader of a co-operative.
A co-operative led by an influential
member of the ruling party enjoys
more sympathetic and favourable attention
from the government officials and
ministers. For instance, one such powerful
leader in Maharashtra succeeded
in securing a licence for a co-operative
sugar factory in an area where there
was hardly any sugarcane. (How this
enterprise later proved very successful
is another story.)

The involvement of politicians in co-operatives
is closely related to the role
which political parties play in the affairs
of co-operatives. It is difficult to make
a clear distinction between the actions
of politicians 'as individuals and their
actions as party members. Such a distinction
can at best be conceptual rather
than empirical. I will deal here mainly
with the attitudes and policies of
political parties.

In Maharashtra, Rajasthan[^/17], Delhi[^/18]
and parts of Uttar Pradesh[^/19], the Congress
Party is closely associated with
the co-operatives. This is also true of
other parties in other States, eg, Swatantra
Party in Gujarat and Communist
Party in Kerala.[^/20]

# KEY POSITIONS

In Maharashtra, many Congressmen
occupy key positions in different co-operatives.
The role of a Congressman
often overlaps with that of a co-operator.
But the party is involved in co-operatives
in other ways as well. It
uses them as its political instruments.
They often contribute, directly or indirectly,
to party funds. Some years
ago, Congress leaders controlling a
sugar factory made the members of the
factory contribute a certain amount to
the party funds in proportion to the
quantity of cane supplied by them.
Similarly, applicants for shares of another
sugar co-operative were made to
contribute five rupees per share to the
local party unit. The Taluka Congress
Committee in the area collected more
than a lakh of rupees mainly through
the co-operatives. And this collection
was made in spite of protests from some
of the members and applicants for
shares. There are several instances of
party meetings, party workers' conferences
and party volunteers' camps being
held in the premises of co-operatives.
In some cases co-operatives acted as
hosts to these gatherings and provided
all the required facilities. In May 1965,
a conference of the Maharashtra Congress
was held in the premises of a
sugar co-operative in spite of objections
from some of its shareholders. This
conference was attended by Central
and State Ministers and over 1,500
delegates from all over the State.[^/21] The
President of the MPCC was reported to
have requested the co-operative sugar
factories in the State to contribute twenty
thousand rupees each for organising the
annual session of the party which was
proposed to be held at Sangli.[^/22] It is
quite common for leaders to use the
vehicles of co-operatives for attending
party conferences at distant places. The
resources of co-operatives prove most
useful to the party particularly during
the elections. It was reported that some
co-operatives lent their jeeps for campaigning
during the Opinion Poll in Goa.
The existence of trade unions in the
co-operative factories provides another
dimension to the involvement of political
parties in co-operatives. If the trade
union and the management of a co-operative
are identified with rival political
parties, it often influences significantly
the relationship between labour
and management.[^/23]

Congressmen in Maharashtra are often
encouraged to be active in co-operatives.
Addressing a meeting of party workers,
in February 1963, the Secretary of the
MPCC strongly advised them to take
a leading part in co-operatives. He
felt that every active Congress member
should be connected with some co-operative
activity. In the party meetings
as well as in public gatherings the
co-operative leaders are commended by
the big party bosses, including the Home
Minister Y B Chavan. In Gujarat and
also in Kerala, political parties encourage
their workers to take up co-operative
work.[^/24]

# CONTROL OF CO-OPERATIVES

The Congress leaders in Maharashtra
realise the value of controlling the co-operatives,
and they resent the attempts
by the leaders of other parties to secure
control over them. In 1964, a Communist
leader in the State secured a majority
vote in the Board of Directors
of a sugar co-operative and was elected
its Chairman. The Congress leaders, who
had lost in the elections, started an
agitation against the new ruling group.
The evils of 'red domination' and the
dangers of the area being converted
into another 'Kerala' or 'Cuba' were
some of the themes of their attack on
the ruling group. A co-operative leader
publicly declared that he was prevented
from becoming the Chairman of the
Maharashtra State Federation of Cooperative
Sugar Factories because he
was not a Congressman.

Control over the co-operatives is not,
however, always an unmixed blessing
for the Congress Party. While the co-operatives
provide strength and certain
advantages to the party, they often lead
to divisions within it. The struggle over
the control of sugar factories and banks
is one of the main causes of factionalism
within the party in certain parts
of Maharashtra. And this appears to
be the case in certain districts of Uttar
Pradesh also.[^/25] in Maharashtra, many
party workers believe that the top leaders
tend to support a stronger faction
and that the strength of rival
factions is generally measured on the
basis of the number of important co-operatives
under their control. Even
ministers and higher party leaders are
accused of interfering in the elections
and factional fights in the co-operatives.
Rival factions use the control of co-operatives
to strengthen their position within
the party. At times the rivalry between
the factions becomes so intense that
they are unable to work together in
support of the official party candidates
in the elections to the legislatures and
Zilla Parishads. The dissident faction
works frequently against these candidates
which often leads to the defeat
of the party even in constituencies
known to be traditional Congress
strongholds.[^/26]

# REFORMIST IDEOLOGY

Although, before Independence, the
Congress Party was not opposed to the
ideology and programme of the co-operative
movement, it did not participate
actively in it for reasons discussed
earlier. With the advent of Independence,
it started taking an active interest in
the co-operative movement. This has
been necessitated largely by the transformation
of the Congress itself from
a movement to a party. As a movement
it was dependent on mass following and
"was inspired by reformist ideology and
sentiments".[^/27] As a party it has to
compete with rival parties and build
bases of support to acquire and retain
power. It can no longer do this on the
basis of ideology and sentiments only.
It has had to create a following based
on the networks of patronage. The co-operatives
and _panchayats_ have provided
an effective ground for developing
these networks. What is more, the
co-operative movement has received a
great impetus from the Congress governments
after Independence. It has
become one of the basic programmes of
rural reconstruction. As a result, members
of the ruling party have come to
be associated increasingly with the co-operatives.

The control over co-operatives makes
a significant difference in the relative
strength of political parties, particularly
in the rural areas. The Congress Party
is by far the most powerful party in
Maharashtra. Apart from its historical
role in the Freedom Movement and the
relative weakness of other parties, what
are the sources of its strength? The
Congress in Maharashtra is identified
with the interests of the 'dominant'
peasant caste of Marathas, and so are
the co-operatives and _panchayat_ bodies.
In his report on the Congress organisation
in Maharashtra, submitted recently
to the Congress Working Committee,
C Subramaniam has also attributed the
strength of the party mainly to its
"constructive activities" in the co-operative
field.[^/28] In his study of the Congress
Party in Uttar Pradesh, Brass reports
that the Congress organisation in the
districts is the political instrument of
the dominant peasant proprietors, and
the struggle for control over local
institutions, including co-operatives, is
the essence of district politics.[^/29] In parts
of Rajasthan, both the Congress Party
and the co-operative movement appear
to be identified with the Jats.[^/30]

# DOUBLE-EDGED WEAPON

Although the political leaders at
different levels express their concern
over the growing tendency towards
mixing up of co-operatives and party
politics, they seem to be doing very
little to check this tendency. The factors
discussed above would perhaps
help one to understand why they are
unable to do so.

The involvement of co-operatives in
party politics cannot be considered an
evil in itself. But when it is condemned
by co-operators, politicians and others,
there is an underlying assumption that
it is harmful to the healthy growth
of the movement. How far is this assumption
justified? A co-operative is
meant to be basically an economic
organisation working for the protection
of the economic interests of its members
and for the improvement of their
economic position. In what ways is
political involvement likely to affect
adversely these legitimate objectives of
a co-operative?

The use of co-operatives as political
instruments is, after all, a double-edged
weapon. Political parties have their own
ups and downs. The instruments used
by one party now will be used by
other parties too whenever they succeed
in capturing the co-operatives. As
Thorner reports, this happened in Kerala
during 1957--60. In Trichur, the Communist
regime encouraged a Toddy-Tappers'
Co-operative and the party
derived certain benefits from it. But the
anti-Communist regime, which came to
power in early 1960, immediately withdrew
government support from the
society. Such instances would multiply
wherever the Congress is replaced by
other parties in power. Commenting
on the Trichur case, Thorner says, "so
intimate a relationship between politics
and co-operatives does not augur well
for the prospects of the movement".
In the progress the co-operatives may
become "political footballs".[^/31]

# UNFAIR BIAS

Sometimes there are complaints that
'politics' introduces an unfair bias in
the admission of new members to a
co-operative. The ruling group in a
co-operative is often accused of enrolling
'bogus' members who are likely to
support it, and keeping out those who
are likely to oppose it. It also resorts
to discrimination in the day-to-day
working of the society. The supporters
of the ruling group enjoy greater facilities
and concessions while their political
rivals are at times denied even
their legitimate claims. The political
opponents are sometimes harassed and
victimised and are not granted loans
and other facilities on time. In some
cases, members refuse to fulfil their
obligations toward a co-operative if it
is controlled by their political rivals.
For instance, the supply of cane to the
co-operative sugar factories is a basic
obligation of the members. Some members
refuse to fulfil this obligation due
to political rivalry. At times leaders of
co-operatives take decisions on political
grounds, setting aside valid economic
considerations. Patronage of various
kinds for political purposes adds to the
costs of a co-operative enterprise and
cuts into its profits. Much of the litigation
in the co-operative field is often
inspired by political motives.

This does not, however, mean that
political involvement is always detrimental
to the interests of co-operatives.
Some co-operatives have prospered
largely because they were led by powerful
members of the ruling party. It
should also be noted that the impressive
growth of the movement in Maharashtra
is due largely to the positive
and sympathetic policy of the Congress
Party and to the initiative and spirit of
enterprise shown by its members.

It will be relevant here to examine
the implications of the political involvement
of co-operatives for the wider
political system. The economic objectives
of co-operatives are their manifest functions,
but they also perform certain
'political functions'[^/32] which are latent
in nature.

The early leaders of the co-operative
movement in the West emphasised the
economic functions of the movement.
But in adopting the democratic principle
for managing the co-operatives they
were aiming to achieve something more.
They hoped that by participating in
co-operatives members would learn the
lessons of self-government.[^/33] Past experience
justifies their hopes. Through
co-operatives, members learn the rules
of the democratic game. Participation in
co-operatives also helps the development
of new values and attitudes to
wards political institutions and towards
the individual's role as a member of a
democratic society. Co-operatives, thus,
perform the function of political
socialisation in relation to the wider
political system.

# POLITICAL RECRUITMENT

Co-operatives are also performing the
function of political recruitment. Several
observers have noted the change in the
character of political leadership since
Independence. The old, upper caste,
Western-educated, middle class, and
town-based leadership is being replaced
by a new, peasant-caste, vernacular-educated
and village-based leadership.
While there are several other factors
contributing to this change, it cannot be
denied that co-operatives, along with
_panchayats_, provide a new source for
the recruitment to the political elite.
Srinivas has noted the role of _panchayati
raj_ system in the training of aspiring
politicians and in providing them approved
means of acquiring political
base.[^/34] His observations are applicable
to the co-operatives too. Co-operatives
also provide a training ground for
acquiring and developing political skills
and building up a support base useful
for the politician in the wider political
arena.

Co-operatives also provide an effective
link of communication between politicians
and voters. This is particularly
important in a country where specialised
communication media have not yet adequately
developed and penetrated into
the rural areas. Co-operatives have
made it possible and easier for politicians
and political parties to reach a
larger number of people to convey
their messages and programmes. As a
result, co-operatives have contributed to
creating greater political awareness
among the people. This has helped to
bring about greater political participation
by the citizens. For instance, constituencies
with a network of important
co-operatives have generally shown a
higher rate of voting in the elections.

In some situations, co-operatives act
as interest groups and articulate the
interests of their members. Whenever
strong co-operatives have emerged, their
leaders have been more articulate and
effective in pressing for various local
demands. They often press for better
irrigation facilities, more fertilisers, new
processing industries, and even ambitious
projects like a paper mill or a fertiliser
factory in the co-operative sector. The
leaders of sugar co-operatives often act
as a pressure group at both the State
and the national levels by trying to
secure better terms and higher prices
for their produce. Their close links with
ministers and legislators (some of them
are legislators themselves) create in
them a remarkable sense of confidence,
In a sense, co-operatives have helped
in creating, to some extent, a certain
kind of "infra-structure" in the rural
areas which is so essential for an ongoing
democratic polity.

To conclude, the political involvement
of co-operatives in India is a
result of a certain historical process.
Some degree of 'politics' seems to be
inherent in the co-operative structure in
the context of the wider political system.
It has to be accepted as a fact
of life.

Although excessive political involvement
may hamper the growth of co-operatives
as economic institutions, such
involvement within certain limits may
not be dysfunctional to them. Moreover,
co-operatives perform certain latent
political functions which are significant
from the point of view of the political
development of a democratic society.

[^/1]: Some of the data used here are
derived from the material collected
through field-work in Maharashtra
during January 1963-August 1964.

[^/2]: Fred Longden, "Co-operative Politics
inside Capitalist Society",
Birmingham: Cornish Bros, 1941.

[^/3]: AM Carr-Saunders, _et al_. "Consumers'
Co-operation in Great Britain",
London: Allen and Unwin,
1942, pp. 39--43, 513--514, 533.

[^/4]: KR Kulkarni, "Theory and Practice
of Co-operation in India and
Abroad", Bombay: Co-operators'
Book Depot, 1958, pp. 31--33, 197--200.

[^/5]: JP Warbasse, "Co-operative Democracy",
New York and London:
Harper and Brothers, Publishers,
1942, p. 118.

[^/6]: Daniel Thorner, "Agricultural Cooperatives
in India", Bombay: Asia
Publishing House, 1964, pp. 11--12.

[^/7]: DR Gadgil, "Sugar Co-operatives
in Maharashtra", New Delhi: National
Federation of Co-operative
Sugar Factories, p. 15.

[^/8]: _Times of India_, December 3, 1967.

[^/9]: _Times of India_, June 24, 1965.

[^/10]: _Samachar_ (Marathi), March 7, 1967.

[^/11]: D R Gadgil, "Socio-Economic
Factors Underlying Pattern of Leadership",
in "Co-operative Leadership
in South-East Asia", Bombay:
Asia Publishing House, 1963, pp.
69--70.

[^/12]: K N Naik, 'Initial Stage of Organisation
(1904--1912), in "Fifty
Years of Co-operation", Bombay:
The Bombay Co-operative Institute,
1954, p. 13.

[^/13]: Gadgil, _op cit_, 1963, p. 70.

[^/14]: L C Jain, "The Co-operative Movement",
_Times of India_, December 1, 1967.

[^/15]: G N Ostergaard and A H Halsey,
"Power in Co-operatives", Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1965, p. 73.

[^/16]: _Janasatta_ (in Marathi), March 31, 1967.

[^/17]: "Co-ops with the Lid Off --- IV"
(in Rajasthan)_Times of India_,
November 14, 1967.

[^/18]: _Times of India_, November 30, 1967.

[^/19]: Paul R Brass, "Factional Politics
in an Indian State", Bombay: Oxford
University Press, 1966, pp. 66--70--71,
127--129.

[^/20]: Thorner, _op cit_, p. 11.

[^/21]: _Maharashtra Times_ (Marathi),
July 3, 1965.

[^/22]: _Nagar Times_ (Marathi), December
9, 1967.

[^/23]: For a detailed account, see my
'Union Politics and Management
Politics', _Indian Journal of Industrial
Relations_, Vol 3, No 3,
January 1968, pp. 300--315.

[^/24]: Thorner, _op cit_, p. 11.

[^/25]: Brass, _op cit_, pp. 66, 70--71, 231.

[^/26]: This is described in detail in my
forthcoming, "Factions and Party
Politics: Assembly Elections in a
Rural Constituency in Maharashtra",
in a volume on the Fourth General
Elections to be published by the
Department of Sociology, University
of Delhi.

[^/27]: Lucian W Pye, "Aspects of Political
Development", Boston and Toronto:
Little, Brown, 1966, p. 191.

[^/28]: _Times of India_, October 8, 1967.

[^/29]: Brass, _op cit_, pp. 229--231.

[^/30]: See note 17.

[^/31]: Thorner, _op cit_, pp. 12--13.

[^/32]: Gabriel A Almond, "Introduction:
A Functional Approach to Comparative
Politics", in Gabriel A Almond
and James S Coleman (eds), "The
Politics of the Developing Areas",
Princeton: Princeton University
Press: 1960, pp. 26--52.

[^/33]: Carr-Saunders _et al_, _op cit_, p. 503.

[^/34]: M N Srinivas, "The Future of Fission",
_Times of India_, November
16, 1967.
