_In India today, private corporate-led
industrialisation is being
equated with development"
and those who oppose such
development are considered
"unlawful", never mind that the
government and the corporations
acquire land through "force and
fraud". Those who organise the
resistance --- "left-wing extremists"
in official parlance --- either face
elimination through military
operations or the total denial
of their democratic rights. It is
therefore necessary to demystify,
rather de-obfuscate, official policy
vis-a-vis "left-wing extremism"._

\ 

"Left-wing extremists" are neither
"enemy combatants" nor stateless
mercenaries. They are our own
people, and they will remain so even when
the government prosecutes war against
them. The term "war" is used deliberately.
When it comes to looking at military suppressions
amidst us, there is a tendency to
characterise them as less than a war. The
reason we do not perceive such suppressions
as war is because they take place
within the borders of the nation state
where the deployment of the "armed forces
of the union" is considered legitimate,
among other reasons, because private corporate-led
industrialisation is equated
with "development" and those who oppose
such development are considered
"unlawful" and often accused of disloyalty
and treason. Never mind that the government
and the corporations acquire land
through "force and fraud". And those who
organise resistance either face elimination
through military operations, crippled by
charges of sedition and "waging war", or
are choked of their right of expression. It
is therefore necessary to demystify, rather
de-obfuscate, official policy vis-a-vis "left-wing
extremism" ("LWE").

On December 20, 2007 at the chief ministers' (CM's)
conference on internal security the
prime minister (PM) in his opening speech
began: "As we survey the national security
scenario, there are a few aspects which
are cause of concern. I wish to highlight a
few of them." He then referred to "LWE"
that continues

>to affect many districts of our country. Just a
few days ago, we had a major incident of a
jailbreak in Chhattisgarh. This was not an isolated
incident. Not a day passes without an
incident of left-wing extremism taking place
somewhere or the other. Over the last year,
the activities of Naxal groups have revealed
new aspects. They seem to have developed
the capability in some areas to launch frontal
attacks on police forces and establishments.
They are certainly targeting all aspects of economic
activity. They are targeting vital economic
infrastructure so as to cripple transport
and logistical capabilities and also slow down
any development activity. This helps them
sustain their ideology of deprivation and
neglect. They have even managed to eliminate
some important political leaders and
their associates in some state.

Therefore, the PM went on to say, "(w)e
cannot rest in peace until we have eliminated
this virus. ... we need to cripple the
hold of _Naxalite_ forces with all means
at our command." He went on to add,
"(w)hile tackling Naxal groups militarily,
we also need to choke their support
infrastructure".

# 'Biggest Security Challenge'

For the PM to reiterate in his speech that
"LWE" is "probably the single biggest security
challenge to the Indian state" is problematic
if not open to question. It is problematic,
because it invokes the omnibus
category of "LWE" to collapse the politics
of all _Naxalite_ groups into a single category.
It is debatable because Manmohan
Singh's own party and the union home
minister hold a position at variance with
his. Indeed, his contention is closer to that
of the Bharatiya Janata Party which makes
it appear that "LWE" afflicts one-third of
India. Whereas the Congress Party has
claimed that just 300 police stations out of
14,000 are affected, the home minister
says that "LWE" is confined to only three
states. Nevertheless, the Congress and the
BJP seem to agree that "LWE" has to be
crushed. Thus 33 battalions of the central
paramilitary forces have been provided to
"_Naxalite_ affected states". The centre is
financing the raising of 35 India Reserve
battalions by "_Naxalite_ Affected States"
(_The Economic Times_, December 25, 2007).
And Chhattisgarh has asked for an additional
10 battalions for just the Abujmad
area of Bastar! All told, 70,000--90,000
armed personnel, about five-seven divisions,
are being pitted against an officially
estimated 8,000--9,000 armed cadres.

All this is intimidating. But people do not
have the propensity to take up arms, let
alone to sustain armed struggle for over
four decades, without popular support. The
area where Maoist insurgency is sustained
is populated by several million people; the
Maoists are organically linked with the
people. And like all organic relationships
it is a live engagement with shared
experiences of working and fighting together,
which at times has become contentious.

It is significant that the PM pins the
blame on "LWE" for slowing down economic
activity, in his view, to "sustain
their ideology", but he is silent over the 60
years of deprivation and neglect by the
state. This is not a matter of detail. It is a
matter of conceptual clarity and therefore
goes to the very heart of the issue. In the
PM's speech, there is reference to uneven
development, the inter-regional divide,
the rural-urban divide and the inter-sectoral
divide. He is even aware of details
such as that "there were only three staff in
the Dantewada jail where the jailbreak
took place" or of "large vacancies of police
personnel across most states". But not
once does he refer to the life experience of
people at the receiving end of official highhandedness,
the greed of the corporate
elite and the bitter struggle over land,
where landless labourers and poor and
middle peasants are protesting against the
loss of livelihoods and the expropriation
of their land through coercion.

# In the Name of 'Development'

Take the district Dantewada in Chhattisgarh,
which figures in the PM's speech. It
has a rural literacy level of 21 per cent;
1,161 out of 1,200 villages have no medical
facility of any kind. The People's Union for
Civil Liberties (Chhattisgarh), in a publication
dated March 2004, report, after investigation,
on the occurrence of deaths
due to hunger and malnutrition in Hirpal
and Gidam block of the district. An allIndia
fact-finding report had noted that

>(w)hile the people of Dantewada are extremely
poor, their land is extremely rich,
both in terms of minerals and forests,
When the government talks of "development",
it appears to have in mind the
development of these resources for private
profit as against the development of its
people. When organisations and movements
have pointed out that the two are
not synonymous, and that the very mining
and industrial activity has been practised
in the past has resulted in the displacement
and consequent pauperisation of tribals in
this region, they are called 'anti-development'?[^/1]

The state government has signed
deals worth Rs 13,000 crore with industrial
corporations and is determined to push
them through. It is this process which is
being heralded as ushering in development.
But what if the people who own or till these
lands do not want this "development"?
Well, the simple way of dealing with them
is to brush aside their opposition.

Take the case of the privatisation of
rivers. Despite strictures passed by the Public
Accounts Committee (PAC) in its report
submitted to the Chhattisgarh legislative
assembly on March 2007 on the privatisation
of the Sheonath river in 1998 --- the PAC
even categorised the mode as "criminal"
--- no action has been taken on the recommendations.
The PAC was set up in 2003 as
a result of a long drawn out struggle
launched by people who were outraged at
the selling of Sheonath river in 1998. While
this agitation was going on, Radius Water,
a company set up by Kailash Engineering,
which won the contract to execute the
project, became the "owner" for 22 years of
the river's waters. This was justified in the
name of meeting the requirement of industries
which also meant concomitant denial
of water for the irrigation needs of farmers
during the summer months. Radius began
fencing land along the river. By 2000 they
fenced 22.7 kms of river, took over
thousands of sq ft of land, as well as 176
acres along the river bank. The company
acquired assets valued at Rs 5 crore by
paying a princely sum of Rs i to the
Madhya Pradesh Aydhyogik Kendra
Nigam and collected Rs 1.84 crore from the
Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development
Corporation in the very first year of operation.
This "criminal" practice also went on
to become the norm. One after another, the
rivers Kelo, Kurkut, Shabri, Kharm and
Maand have been handed over to private
companies. Coincidentally, a large part of
the very same Sheonath river whose privatisation
had been described as a crime, and
which flows through Dantewada, is under
occupation of Essar Steel Chhattisgarh
(Ashok Prakash Putul, 'Bastar Privatisation
Unlimited: Rivers for Sale in Chhattisgarh'
at www.bhumkal.blogspot.com).

What is being implemented is a model of
development as if people do not matter. A
report of the People's Union for Democratic
Rights (PUDR) into three mining projects in
Orissa's Kalahandi and Rayagada districts
confirms this widespread phenomenon and
notes the "extreme marginalisation of most
people" in the two districts. The report
speaks of "near total dependence on
depressed agriculture ... low irrigation facilities
... worsened by inequitable land relations,
token and partial land reforms, and
by extremely low educational levels and
healthcare facilities provided by the state.
It is in these conditions that these ... mining
projects are pushed through". It describes
the secret surveys and procuring of consent
through force and fraud and points to the
carrot of "vague oral promises of permanent
jobs and large salaries, made by the
company and district administration." The
stick was "anything but imaginary. From
armed police and paramilitary presence
everywhere, flag marches through peaceful
tribal villages, beatings, threats, arbitrary
warrants and arrests, to firing and killing of
protestors --- the regions even remotely
affected by the alumina projects live under
the constant shadow of the stick".[^/2]

Such findings are repeated elsewhere
across the country, in particular, the _adivasi
areas_ of Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and
Orissa. Contemporaneously, the Delhi High
Court recently quashed the grant of a prospecting
licence to Tata Steel to mine iron
ore in an area spread over 2,500 ha of forests
in Dantewada. The high court ruled
that whenever the state is asked to divert
any land for non-forest purposes, prior approval
under the relevant forest law and
rules are needed (_Press Trust of India_, New
Delhi, February 25, 2008). Tribals were so
resentful of the loss of their multi-crop
fertile land that they were talking of armed
resistance against the 5 million tonne Tata
Steel plant coming up in Dantewada for
which these mines were sought. The inspector
general of police (Bastar range)
however warned that "strictest of action
will be taken against anybody coming in
the way of the democratic process involved
in setting up this plant" (_The Hindustan
Times_, November 18, 2007).

The order only quashes the mining right
but not the setting up of the steel plant for
which too land was acquired. Therefore, it
is a partial relief and probably temporary
too; the superior court may stay this order.
Or, if everything else fails, the government
can propose changes to circumvent
the judicial ruling, as was attempted in
2000 after the Andhra Pradesh High Court
judgment in the Samatha case.[^/3]

There have also been gross violations of
statutory provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996,
especially section 4 (i) which provides for
consultations with the gram sabhas for
land acquisition and also empowers them
under section 4(m)(3) to prevent alienation
of land in scheduled areas as well as
to restore "any unlawfully alienated land
in a scheduled area". In area after area
gram sabhas have seen their statutory
powers cast aside by the corporations. An
obliging government machinery wilfully
uses the security forces to coerce _adivasis_
into signing away their land in exchange
for "trinkets", failing which they face eviction
without "compensation". The fate of
other protective legislations which regulate
the procedure for land or forest acquisition
has been no different.

# Parallel Orbits

In short, the lived experience of people has
been that writ petitions, affidavits and
memoranda have not helped arrest, let
alone reverse, the loss of rivers, lands and
forests, the criminal prosecution of those
who staked claims to _adivasi land_ and/or
manufactured gram sabha consent in
Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and Orissa for
corporate-led industrialisation. In Dantewada
district in 2006 land was acquired
for the Essar and Tata projects through the
use of force (_Down to Earth_, October 31,
2006 for details). In Kocheipadar gram
sabha in Rayagada district of Orissa too,
consent for the Alcan--Hindalco project was
forcibly acquired (_The Times of India_, April
4, 2006). More recently, in Kalinganagar in
Orissa, a private army is browbeating
villagers to give their land to the multi-national
South Korean company POSCO.

Dantewada is not just an area notorious
for the Salwa Judum (SJ) caused evacuation
of 644 villages and displacement of
3,00,000 people, but also for the illegal
and unlawful occupation of lands, forests
and rivers by corporations, and the manufacturing
of gram sabha consent under
duress. Interestingly, even when the PM refers
to the jailbreak he remains innocent of
the issue of arrest of _adivasis_ and their incarceration
in crowded jails for simply being
in the way of corporate marauders and
their administrative henchmen.

It is unlawful to advocate/express an
opinion on the matter of seizure of power
and to work to change the world. How is
this to be done? Should it be through an
armed struggle, peaceful means or a fusion
of the two is an open-ended question
and there is as much to be said one way or
the other. Why should the opponents of
the Indian state be gagged, banned, censored,
arrested, tortured, narco-analysed,
brain mapped, killed or entangled in so
many cases that chances of freedom in
one's lifetime become remote if not impossible?
Why should these voices be smothered?
Why should mobilisation against
oppressive conditions be denied because a
slice of Indian society is convinced that
salvation lies in ramming through corporate
industrialisation via the creation of
enclaves following upon acquisition of fertile
land or forests by repressive means?

Remarkably, when _adivasis_ have demonstrated
peacefully, their demands have remained
unheeded. Six weeks before the
PM delivered his speech to the CMs,
2,00,000 _adivasis_ gathered at Jagdalpur,
on November 5 last year. They had walked
for 3--5 days from a radius of 250 kms
around Jagdalpur to attend a rally of the
_Adivasi Mahasangh_. The slogans called for
a withdrawal of the paramilitary forces and
expressed an emphatic _no_ to the SJ. The
tribal people demonstrated against land
acquisition and corporate plunder. If they
were upset with the Maoists they could
have given vent to their feelings against
them. But they did not. Why? Because the
mass of _adivasis_ living outside the SJ camps
are concerned with "operation land/forest/water grab"
and the crimes of the SJ
activists and the paramilitary, rather than
the alleged "_dadagiri_" of the "_dadalog_" (as
the Maoists leaders are called).

It is necessary to ponder over the baleful
tone of the operative parts of the PM's
speech: "eliminate this virus"; "cripple the
hold" ... with "all means at our command";
"choke the support infrastructure" of "all
the _Naxalite_" groups or forces. However, it
is one thing to desire something but quite
another to succeed. A clear-headed analysis
will show that 42 years of fighting government
forces has enabled "LWE" to hone
its skills. A "frontal assault capability" in
simple language means an ability to move
200--1,000 armed cadres to mount a swift
raid on an armoury, or organise a jailbreak
with spectacular success. It surely requires
stable popular support to carry out such
operations. In this sense, attempts to rout
the Maoists militarily, which have been
tried since 1967, has made them resilient.

It needs to be emphasised that the overwhelming
majority of those who come
under the omnibus category of "left-wing
extremists" or those arrested are/were not
involved in violent activity. They are
engaged in legitimate political activity
--- working with and organising the exploited
and the oppressed or writing about violations
of their democratic rights, researching
social issues, campaigning and protesting
against injustice. Many of those arrested
are not even "left-wing extremists". It is by
invoking the Unlawful Activities Prevention
Act (UAPA), 2004 and provisions under this
act to proscribe that certain organisations,
ideologies, political activities and anyone
even hobnobbing with them are deemed to
be "criminal".[^/4] By denying even legitimate
political space, the government is sending
a message that either the "left-wing extremists"
should surrender or they pick up a
gun. Common sense suggests that proscribing
"LWE" from legitimate political activity
is counterproductive. It is in the denial
of what is legitimate that other means --- including
armed resistance --- gain legitimacy.

The 60 years since transfer of power
testifies to the fact that there were more
occasions when people's grievances
were heard when they took to arms than
when they resorted to non-violent
protests. Even after 60 years since the
transfer of power more than 77 per cent of
our people survive on Rs 20 or less
per day; land-related struggles have
proliferated even as the incidence of
riding roughshod over peaceful protests
of the oppressed has multiplied. To
expect that those consigned to the
margins of existence will continue to
display forbearance and patience is contrary
to contemporary reality. The promise
that corporate-led industrialisation
will benefit them at some distant future is
like a "pie in the sky" and not many are
willing to resign themselves to wait for
that to happen. It is in this context that the
armed resistance derives its legitimacy. It
is the criminal negligence of our people's
welfare that is responsible for causing the
Maoist-led rebellion.

It is worth remembering that "peace
talks" lost their meaning following the
experience of Andhra Pradesh (AP). For all
the propaganda of the AP state police and
the intelligence bureau about the Maoists
consolidating their position during the
talks, the fact is that they were dealt a setback:
500--600 killed, 1,300 arrested, 76
"disappeared". Insistence by the government
that unless the "left-wing extremists"
surrender their arms and give up their resistance
there can be no negotiation has, in the
light of AP experience of 2005, meant that
Maoists have no choice but to defend themselves.
Surrender by cadres is possible but
that of the movement is clearly ruled out.

Regrettably, in this war, apart from civilian
casualties, a large number of those whose
dedication and commitment to their people's
emancipation is exemplary will perish. If
the truth be told the Indian state has neither
the imagination nor the inclination to
conceive of anything other than privileging
war against its own people. Nor is it interested
in learning lessons from its 42-year
old war against "LWE". But, the Indian
government ought not to be allowed to get
away with claiming a privileged position in
the name of "law and order" or sovereign
right to mistreat its own people whom it
turns into its enemies.

[^/1]: 'When the State Makes War on Its Own People:
A Report on Violation of People's Rights during
the Salwa Judum Campaign in Dantewada,
Chhattisgarh', an all-India fact finding by APDR
(West Bengal), IAPL, PUCL (Chhattisgarh), PUCL
(Jharkhand) and PUDR (Delhi), April 2006, p. 7
www.pudr.org

[^/2]: 'Halting the Mining Juggernaut: People's Struggles
against Alumina Projects in Orissa', PUDR,
July 2005, p. 13, www.pudr.org.

[^/3]: See 'Abandoned: Development and Displacement',
published by the Perspectives Team, New
Delhi, 2007, chapter 111, pp 15--17. This researched
reference book cites a letter from ministry of
mines (No 16/48/97-M.VI dated July 10, 2000)
which proposes amendment to the fifth schedule
and Article 244 under the plea these Acts "cannot
purport to take away the sovereign right of government
to transfer its land in any manner".

[^/4]: For more on the pernicious nature of the Unlawful
Activities Prevention Act, 2004, the reader may
refer to the PUDR report, 'Obsessive Pursuit: The
Unlawful Activities Prevention Act (2004) Reinforcing
a Draconian Law, January 2005, www.pudr.org
