\clearpage

## The Birth of an Industrial Workforce

### The Transition to Factorized Production

During the pre-colonial and early colonial period Gujarat was renowned
in South Asia and beyond as a centre for growing cotton and for textile
production. In addition to cotton cloth, finer-quality textiles were also
produced, including silk, velvet, satin, and brocade. These fabrics were
not only sold in local markets but were also shipped to far-away countries
in Asia and Europe. The rich history of the early textile industry in
western India is well documented and will not be considered in this
study. Its importance can be illustrated by reference to sources which
describe Gujarat as one of the major industrial regions in South Asia
from the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries, accounting for a quarter
of the world's activity then in this industry.[^/5/1] My point of departure is the
introduction of mechanized production in the mid-nineteenth century.
The consequent development of factory production led to the gradual
decline and ultimate disappearance of manual spinning and weaving,
and the further processing of the textiles to end products. My interest in
the new enterprises is not so much in the emerging captains of industry
and how they financed and organized this new form of production,[^/5/2] as in
the other human factor of production --- the origin and social identity of
the workforce. How were these people employed, what was their way of
life, and the collective action with which the rapidly growing army of
industrial workers succeeded in forcing improvements of their lot.

[^/5/1]: Chandavakar, 1994: 46

[^/5/2]: For a description of the origins, background, and working methods of the new
industrial entrepreneurs, see Gillion (1968), Mehta (1982) and others.

Cotton was usually spun close to where it was grown, as a cottage
industry in the villages and small towns. For the poor in rural Gujarat,
this was a form of extra income which they combined with other
occupations, such as farming. It was largely women's work: 'almost all the
women in the towns and villages used to spin cotton thread' (Gillion
1968: 100). The same source mentions that weaving was much more
restricted to certain castes, particularly the _Dheds_ and Muslims. The
involvement of urban merchants in the advanced stages of the manufacture
of cotton materials took the form of advance payments to permit the
rural artisans to purchase their daily needs. In this way, non-agrarian
activity in the village economy was closely linked to --- and dependent
on --- that of the towns and cities (_see also_ Perlin 1983). It is not certain
whether the putting-out system which evolved in the second half of the
seventeenth century --- under which merchants provided the weavers
with yarn and with credit in exchange for the exclusive rights to their
products --- occurred under growing influence of European mercantile
interests or as part of a more localized restructuring of this early industrial
activity (Lakha 1988:25).

In any case, production increased considerably from the late sixteenth
century. This development, which was the outcome of market expansion
to other Asian destinations, was accompanied by a progressive division of
labour which resulted in a group of professional spinners exclusively
engaged in producing yarn for full-time weavers' (Gopal 1975: 219;
Lakha 1988: 26--7). Ahmedabad, founded in 1411 by Ahmad Shah, was
one of the cities where artisanal expertise was abundantly available for
the final processing of the textiles (bleaching and dyeing). The progressive
division of the various stages of production helped the merchantmoneylenders
strengthen their grip on the industry. They appropriated a
large proportion of the surplus value generated by the production
process. Opinions differ on how to appraise the relationship between
traders and artisans. In contrast to authors who emphasize the relationship
of indebtedness of the weavers (Moreland 1962: 173 and 1975:
201; Gopal 1977: 234), others contend that the weavers possessed their
own means of production, which made them more autonomous. There
was, therefore, little question of them being in a position of complete
subjugation with respect to those who commissioned their products. In
this latter view, merchant capital did not penetrate to the heart of the
industrial organization, and was unable or unwilling to exercise any real
control over it (Lakha 1988: 25). Gillion, too, stated that 'Ahmedabad
did not have the parasitic, exploitative relationship to the surrounding
countryside so often assumed to have been true of Asian cities in general'
(1968: 29). This does not alter the fact that the standard of living of this
proto-industrial working class was and remained extremely low. The
poverty in which they lived from generation to generation was often
linked to the abundant supply of labour, which resulted in low wages and
hindered the transition to more capital-intensive methods of production
(Lakha 1988: 27--8).

Spinning and weaving took the form of a cottage industry in the town
and in the countryside. In the towns and cities, the production of highquality
materials like brocade, in which gold and silver thread were used,
was concentrated in _karkhanas_. In these workshops, artisans produced
for the aristocracy, by commission of and under the direct supervision of
owner-entrepreneurs. It was, however, a different story for the rough
cotton fabrics which were intended exclusively for the local markets and
which required much less training and specialization to produce. In the
context of the division of labour that developed in the colonial period,
this sector of the non-agrarian economy had to compete increasingly
with low-priced yarns and textiles from England. This led commentators
as early as in the middle of the nineteenth century to declare indigenous
textile manufacturing in old production centres like Ahmedabad dead
and buried (Lakha 1988: 41). Others, however, reported that consumers
still preferred home-manufactured products, even if they were of inferior
quality to and more expensive than those from Europe (Mehta 1982: 9;
Shah 1990: 106). The largest part of the yarns produced in the industrial
spinning ateliers were sold under the putting-out system, directly or via
merchants, to artisan weavers who continued to produce textiles by hand
until the outbreak of the First World War (Ray 1982: 391--2).

In 1861, Ranchodlal Chhotalal, a member of a prominent family of
Nagar Brahmins in Ahmedabad, opened the first steam-driven cotton
mill in the city. It was a copy of a mechanical spinning mill built by an
industrial pioneer in Broach in 1855. Around the same time, similar
mills were set up in Bombay. The mill equipment transported to
Ahmedabad was lost _en route_, so a second attempt had to be undertaken.
This was no simple matter. The machinery had to be carried by ship
from Bombay to the port of Cambay, and then by a train of ox-carts to
Ahmedabad. When the venture proved a success --- the production price
was much lower than that of imported yarns --- Ranchodlal found a
number of _Baniyas_ from the city's mercantile elite willing to finance the
setting up of the Ahmedabad Spinning and Weaving Company. The
capacity of what was initially a spinning mill was expanded in 1864,
when the addition of 100 weaving looms resulted in lengthening the
production process. The number of employees grew explosively from an
original 63 to 300 in 1864 and 500 in 1867. Ranchodlal reported that
the large majority of the first batch of mill workers were not only
illiterate but also completely unfamiliar with the principles of mechanized
production. The Englishman who installed the equipment in the
first mill also had the job of teaching the workers to operate it (Mehta
1982: 54--5). The high-caste families springing from the vested economic
interests in the city who had been waiting to see how this new
form of industry would work now became the owner-operators of
composite textile mills. After a relatively slow start, the number of mills
grew rapidly, and of the 26 that were in operation at the end of the
nineteenth century, half had not yet been founded a decade before. At
this early stage, the emphasis was on the spinning and weaving of rough,
cheap cotton fabrics, not yet bleached or dyed, almost exclusively intended
for sale to the mass of the population. From 1864, retail through
local merchants on markets in the west of the country was facilitated by
the laying of the railway line which connected Ahmedabad to Bombay.
As this new infrastructure network grew it provided a substantial boost
for distribution of the textile products in the northern regions of India.
The _swadeshi_ movement launched in 1905 as an early expression of
economic nationalism, which urged the people of India to buy locally
produced goods, also considerably strengthened the budding textile
industry and the class of entrepreneurs it spawned. The Ahmedabad
Millowners Association (AMA) was set up in 1891 primarily as a
response to the need for the producers to defend their common interests
against the colonial administration. By joining forces, the industrial
entrepreneurs were able to resist the pressure from the authorities,
themselves under pressure from the Manchester textile lobby, to increase
the cost of labour. But from an early stage this collective platform was
also instrumental in opposing or defusing demands from the growing
army of workers for an improvement in their working conditions.


+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| Year | Mills (#) | Spindles (#) | Looms (#) | Workers (#) |
+======+==========:+=============:+==========:+============:+
| 1861 | 1         | 2,500        | \         | 63          |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1867 | 2         | 20,000       | 228       | 500         |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1878 | 4         | 51,528       | 684       | 800         |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1881 | 9         | 193,737      | 2,485     | 2,013       |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1894 | 12        | 237,553      | 4,132     | 7,451       |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1899 | 26        | 467,246      | 5,459     | 9,448       |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1905 | 32        | 577,166      | 7,197     | 16,964      |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1907 | 37        | 677,065      | 9,716     | 21,585      |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1908 | 47        | 850,887      | 12,807    | 24,473      |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1914 | 49        | 963,472      | 19,288    | 29,996      |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
| 1918 | 51        | 1,061,115    | 22,255    | 35,415      |
+------+-----------+--------------+-----------+-------------+
: Growth of the Textile Industry, 1861--1918[^tab11-source]

[^tab11-source]: _Source_: S.J. Patel 1985: 22.


### Origin and Identity of the Industrial Workforce

There is a dearth of detailed information on the origin of the first
generation of mill workers. It is reasonable to assume that the city itself
and its immediate environs had a substantial reservoir of labour with
some experience in the mainly home-based manufacture of textiles,
which the mills were initially able to tap. A substantial minority of the
working population in the four mills which were in operation in
Ahmedabad in 1879 came from the middle and upper castes. By far the
majority hailed from what was called the working class, a very heterogeneous
group of city-dwellers which included Muslims, _Kolis_, _Marathas_,
_Pardesis_, _Bavchas_, _Vaghris_ and _Marvadis_ (Gazetteer of the Bombay
Presidency, vol IV, 1879: 132). Ahmedabad had a total population of
only 119,672 in 1872.

The gradual expansion of the capacity of the mills forced the owners
to look for a new source of labour outside the urban economy. They
found this in the surrounding countryside and more specifically in the
households of Muslims (_Tais_ and _Bohras_) and among the untouchable
castes (_Dheds_ and _Vankars_). These segments had since long supplemented
their income from working on the land by spinning and weaving
and who had seen this home-based activity disappear with the arrival of
mechanized textile production. Given the encroaching poverty and the
stagnation of the rural economy, it took little to persuade the menfolk,
and often their entire household, from these subaltern strata to seek their
fortune in the city by signing on to work at the mills. Although the
decline of artisan textile production did not occur overnight, spinning as
a cottage industry disappeared relatively quickly. The availability of
industrially produced yarns, however, enabled many weavers to continue
to produce traditional goods, such as _dhotis_, _turbans_ and _pagris_, demand
for which prevailed until well into the twentieth century.

One measure of handweaving's persistence lay in its claim of over 25% of
Gujarat's cloth market in the 1920s. In the district of Ahmedabad alone there
were in 1896 about 4,000 handlooms whose output was valued at 1.5 million
rupees; and in 1891 there were altogether 37,563 weavers. The city of Ahmedabad
had as many as 10,000 weavers in 1900, and as late as 1914 there were still 1,000
handlooms. Despite the blows inflicted upon local handicraft production, it
continued to survive in western India, and in 1911 there were more people in
handicraft production than in the mills. (Lakha 1988: 45--6)

Nevertheless, the advance of factorized production was unstoppable.
Towards the end of the nineteenth century, when the pool of labour still
available in Ahmedabad proper was unable to keep up with the rapidly
growing demand, landless and landpoor households increasingly migrated
to the city from the surrounding areas to work in the mills. The
need for mill hands was so high that jobbers offered parents a premium
if they allowed their sons to work for them. In exchange for the payment
of a lump sum, the jobber was entitled to the earnings of the young
apprentices in his gang for a period of two to three years (RCIL 1929:10). During that period he was responsible for bed and board for the
apprentices. This debt-bonded relationship meant that the young workers
had no opportunity to change employers. The incentive to leave was
even greater because wages in the rural economy were far lower than
those in the new branch of industrial employment in the cities. For the
majority, the disadvantages of a long working day and heavy physical
work were outweighed by the higher earnings.

While the new urban proletariat in other parts of the country seemed
reluctant to give up their ties with the rural existence they had left
behind, the industrial workforce in Ahmedabad adapted to its new
urban surroundings very quickly. By the turn of the century the city's
population had increased to 185,889. In the early years, there was
evidently little need to attract workers from the rural hinterland. When
that migration started to gather momentum at the end of the nineteenth
century, as a consequence of the accelerated expansion of the textile
industry, the newcomers displayed little or no desire to make regular
visits to their former homes or to pass on all or part of their earnings to
family members they had left behind. A government report from 1892
stated that 'Ahmedabad appears to be the only great centre of the cotton
industry that possesses what may be called a separate mill population'
(Bombay Provincial Report on the Working of the Indian Factories Act,
1892, vol. 2). According to a statement made in 1929 by the Ahmedabad
Millowners' Association to the Royal Commission on Labour in India,
four-fifths of the working population had been recruited within a 50mile
radius of the city. The great majority had settled in Ahmedabad
with their families. Only a small minority bothered to return to their
villages for visits of a few weeks, even for religious and other festivities
(Gillion 1968: 100; Lakha 1990: 429--30). This also explains why
absenteeism, about which employers in other textile centres complained
bitterly, was much less of a problem in Ahmedabad (Patel 1987: 27).

The work in the mills was determined by the caste identity which the
workers had brought with them to the city. _Dheds_ and _Vankars_, who had
supplemented their income from farm labour by weaving, were put to
work in the spinning shops, as were the _Chamars_, a leather-tanning
caste. These untouchables were not admitted to the weaving shops,
which were the domain of the Muslims and of higher castes like the
_Kanbis_. This division of labour, which developed towards the end of the
nineteenth century, was justified on the basis that weavers needed both
hands and their mouth to tie a knot in the thread if it broke or to suck the
yarn onto the shuttle whenever a weft bobbin was replaced. If members
of the untouchable castes were permitted to do this work, it would defile
the resulting product. This pollution would be passed on to the subsequent
stages of production. To avoid this, the untouchables were only
eligible for the preceding phase of spinning, which paid far less. Although
this meant a substantial demotion for the _Vankars_, who had after
all been hand-weavers, for the _Vaghris_ work even at the lowest level of the
mill hierarchy was a step up (Lakha 1988: 87--8).

Once it was in place, this segmentation became institutionalized
through the way in which newcomers were recruited. This generally
occurred via word of mouth, through family members, and members of
one's own caste. In the early decades, it was mediated by jobbers, who
came from the same milieu as those he recruited. In other textile centres,
too, such as Bombay and Madras, the division of labour was largely
based on caste membership. Morris has warned against attributing this
method of organizing production to the resilience of the traditional
social order. In his path-breaking study on the evolution of the industrial
workforce in the cotton mills in Bombay, he pointed out that the refusal
to allow members of the untouchable castes access to the weaving shops
may have been driven by economic motives. As latecomers to the mills,
they found this more skilled and therefore better paid work already being
carried out by higher-caste Hindus and Muslims (Morris 1965: 79). In
Ahmedabad, too, there are indications that _Harijans_ who came to the
city in search of work after being pushed out from the rural economy
towards the end of the nineteenth century had to be content with lowpaid
work avoided by labourers from social strata that had already been
embedded in the urban economy for many generations.

>The lot of the _Harijan_, i.e. the untouchable worker of mills was worse than that
of his confreres of higher castes. Along with the women of his caste he was
allowed to work only in the Reeling Department and was paid at the rate of three
paise per day. Thanks to jobber Ratanaji of the Gujarat Spinning Mill who hailed
from Surat, the untouchable worker was given an entry into his mill. Later on
Mohammedan jobbers also helped him in getting into different mills. In those
days many accidents used to occur in the throstle departments of mills and
workers considered them very unsafe to work there. Since workers from upper
castes usually did not agree to working in them, they were spared for the
untouchable worker. (Majmundar 1973: 120)

A division of labour initially based on the phased arrival of new groups
in the mills may have become institutionalized in the form of recruitment
of workers according to identities founded on primordial characteristics.

### Organization of the Production Process

The _mukadam_, the jobber, not only played a prominent role as a
recruiter of workers but was also the foreman of the gang which he had
put together and which he led at the mill. The activities on the workfloor
were conducted without any direct involvement by the owner or his
managers. The latter were usually Europeans, imported for their technical
know-how, but with no knowledge at all of the local language. The
delegation of responsibility for the daily cycle of the production process
meant that the jobbers had a free hand in how they treated the workers.
The workers themselves were even forbidden to address the higher bosses
personally. This custom of giving the jobbers complete responsibility for
all operational tasks, making them the lowest level in the management
hierarchy, was not unique to the textile mills in Ahmedabad. In his study
of the advance of industrial capitalism in Bombay, Chandavarkar identified
the foremen as the key figures in the work regime, as did Murphy for
Madras (Chandavarkar 1994: 100; Murphy 1981: 34--5).[^/5/3]

New and inexperienced members of the gang received instruction
from skilled work mates, but the _mukadam_ kept a close eye on this
training and assigned the newcomers their tasks. He could reward his
subordinates by putting them forward for a permanent contract or by
granting them favours, such as special leave or permission to bring along
a family member or someone from their village. The foremen could also
dispense punishment: fines for not doing their work well enough, salary
deductions, demotion to status of casual labourer, or instant dismissal for
those who made a nuisance of themselves. They used physical force to
back up their authority without being called to order by their superiors.
This also applied to extra levies, including _dasturi_, a one-off or regular
payment that the members of the gang often had to pay to be permitted
to work. Then there was the profit on the bed and board paid by single
young men and the high interest on advances and loans. Yet, even
without these extra sources of income, the foremen earned at least five
times more than a skilled worker. It was, however, not so much the
higher income that gave the _mukadam_ such power, as the almost unrestricted
latitude granted him by his superiors. This extended to farreaching
intimidation of the gang members, including demanding sexual
favours from their wives.

The _mukadam_ usually came from the same background as his gang
members. His roots in an identical social milieu made it easier to recruit
and discipline the labour needed for the continuing expansion of the
new industry. In addition to being a seasoned worker himself, and
therefore possessing a thorough understanding of the work performed
under his supervision, the foreman had to know enough about the
machines to keep them operating and to make small repairs if necessary.
At least as important was an ability to urge the members of his gang, both
individually and collectively, to do their work satisfactorily day in-andday
out. The prominent role of the _mukadam_ in instilling discipline was
by no means restricted to the workfloor. His authority extended beyond
the mill gates, to the settling of disputes between workers or even within
the sphere of the household.

[^/5/3]: According to Chandavarkar, these first line managers were not survivors of a preindustrial
past, but appeared on the scene when new industrial management methods
were imported from late-Victorian England. In my view, this is open to discussion.
Without interpreting it as a continuation of a specific cultural characteristic of Indian
economy and society, I tend to link the emergence of these middlemen with the large-scale
mobilization of migrant labour that took place in the early colonial period in response to
the demands of new capitalist modes of industrial production (see Breman 1990: chapter 3).


There was no lack of interest in working in the new industry. The
labour available in the _bazar_ economy of Ahmedabad was eventually
exhausted. When recruitment shifted to the hinterland-initially close
by in Central and Northern Gujarat and later further afield in regions
like Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, and even Andhra Pradesh-it tapped a
virtually unlimited reservoir of labour. Yet long-distance migrants were
few among the first generations of mill workers in Ahmedabad. At the
end of the 1920s, four out of five workers in the modern textile sector
had been born or brought up either in or within a 50-mile radius of the
city. When the number of mills expanded rapidly towards the end of the
nineteenth century, the new industrial entrepreneurs or their managing
agents had no scruples about trying to lure work-gangs away from other
establishments. During this period of labour scarcity, _mukadams_ were
sometimes forced to bribe not only skilled workers, but also new ones,
with tea, tobacco, a little extra spending money, or advances on their
wages. In some cases, entire gangs would follow their _mukadam_ and
defect to another employer.

Work started before sunrise and continued until sunset. In the hot
summer months, the working day could last thirteen hours or more. In
the early years, there were no regulated breaks, during which the machines
would be switched off. The workers had no time to rest and were
not allowed to interrupt their work for lunch. They either had to eat the
food that they had brought with them while the machines were in
operation or to fill in for each other so that they could go outside for a
bite or a smoke, or to relieve themselves in the open air. The mills lacked
even the most elementary facilities, such as drinking water or toilets. The
factory buildings were dark and badly ventilated, so that the cotton dust
caused lasting damage to lungs and bronchial tubes. Light and fresh air
could only get in through a few openings in the high roof, and was
insufficient to make the heavy work regime bearable. During spinning,
the thread often broke because of the dryness of the air. To counteract
this, steam was blown into the hall, making the atmosphere more
intolerable, even without physical movement. The temperature could
reach 90 to 100 degrees centigrade. Before they started work, the
workers took off their upper garments and went around in their underwear.
The dress code in the mill was shorts and singlet, and a small towel
around the neck to wipe away the sweat. The exhaustion that this caused
was made clear in the testimony of a worker to the Indian Factory
Labour Commission in 1908:

>We have to work in great heat and are exhausted so much that at times men faint
in that hot weather and have to be taken home in carts. (quoted in Shah 1990:441)

Unaccustomed to working in a closed and congested space and exposed
to the great heat and humidity, the deafening noise of the machinery, and
the brutal supervision of the gang-leader, the first generation of workers
must have found the circumstances in which they had to work very
difficult. The textile workers in Madras are reported to have compared
their workplaces to large cattle sheds. To be shut up in such a dark and
intimidating workplace all day, every day must have been a fate to which
many newcomers could not easily reconcile themselves. But there is
almost no evidence of workers refusing to subject themselves to this
regime and returning to the _bazar_ economy.

Leave was not a right but a favour that was arbitrarily granted,
depending on the mood of the gang-boss. From the opening of the first
mill, Sunday was kept free as a day of rest. But even this recess was
restricted as many of the workers had to go to the mill for a few hours to
clean the machines and the workplace. Illness or family events like births,
marriages, or deaths were not considered a good enough reason to take
time off. Absence in such cases was tolerated as a failure to fulfil the duty
to work, an offence which the workers were lucky to get away with
without punishment other than having their wage withheld. It would be
untrue, however, to imply that the workforce acquiesced in this regime
of relentless subjugation. It was quite usual for them to miss a one or two
days' work after receiving their two-weekly wage. The bonus offered by
employers to discourage this practice of irregularity had little or no
effect. Sick pay was unheard of and medical costs were reimbursed only
if they were incurred as a result of the work --- in the case, not so rare, of
industrial accidents. As the workers got older, their health deteriorated
and few were able to carry on working after the age of 40 or, in extreme
instances, 45. Many were so worn out that they chose, or were forced, to
give up their jobs earlier.

Labour was a commodity which the industrialists preferred to make
use of without being held accountable for the harsh nature of the work
regime. The tendency to assume that the worst excesses prevailed only in
the early pioneering years and that industrial relations gradually improved
is incorrect. In 1905, when electric lighting was installed in the
mills, the working day was extended to 15 hours. Production started
early in the morning and continued to eight or nine o'clock in the
evening. The workers had to find their way home in the dark. A survey
conducted by the Factory Labour Commission in 1908 revealed that
they longed to return to the earlier routine of working from sunrise to
sunset.

>All the mill hands in Ahmedabad are unanimous in wishing that the hours of
work should be restricted. At present we do not get a single hour of daylight at
home. Those mills which have no electric light work from sunrise to sunset and
those with electric light work on until 8 or 9 p.m. Often we find that the electric
light injures our eyes but men in mills where it is installed, have to work long
hours by it, otherwise they would lose their places. (quoted in Shah 1990: 437)

The workers were not permitted to leave the mills while the machines
were still in operation. Conversely, however, if the machines broke down,
not only the operators, but the workers in the previous and subsequent
phases of production, were also sent home without pay for the rest of the
day or longer.

### The Inferior Quality of Labour

The heavy work regime did not mean that the mill owners were satisfied
with the quality of the workers' efforts. They never stopped complaining
about the inefficiency of their employees, who were accused of only
reluctantly subjecting themselves to the demands of the industrial production
process, of a lack of dedication to performing the tasks as
required and, more generally, of stubbornly refusing to accept responsibility
for the work they had been given. This proclaimed shortfall across
a broad spectrum was expressed in a far lower level of productivity than
that achieved in the industrialized West during the same period. An
English factory manager in Ahmedabad made the following statement to
an official commission of investigations, established by the colonial
administration:

>The Indian Labourer is entirely of a different type from the labour one finds in
England. He is very careless, independent and irregular and spends most of his
time loafing about the mill compound smoking, talking, washing his teeth and
so on.

As early as 1888, the Collector in Ahmedabad had made similar
observations:

>It is admitted that the labourers in an Ahmedabad mill are not worked half so
hard as in an English one, and that cheap though the labour may be, it takes two
natives (or, according to some well-informed managers, three) to do the work of
one English hand. (both quoted in Shah 1990: 438--9)

The same criticism was made by the textile barons of Bombay in the
early stages of industrialization and is convincingly refuted by Morris in
his eminent study (1965). The way in which the mill workers tried to
escape the rhythm of industrial production was initially the result of the
intolerable conditions in which they were expected to work and the
excessively long working day. In resisting, they called upon the rich
arsenal of weapons of the weak: evasion, feigned misunderstanding of
orders, bowing to pressure without succumbing to it, sabotage, etc. As a
matter of fact, absenteeism was much less of a problem in Ahmedabad
than in Bombay, where the working population was drawn from a much
wider radius and where ties with the rural-agrarian milieu remained
quite strong. The argument that the mills had to keep a reserve of labour
to ensure that production could continue without interruption was not
the result of a lack of discipline which regrettably pushed up the price of
the end product. The fact that more labourers were taken on than were
actually needed was the result of a form of operational management in
which the costs of supervision were saved by delegating this task to
jobbers, and whereby wages were based on work performed rather than
time spent at the mill (Gillion, 1968: 103; Shah 1990: 444). This meant
that, in terms of costs, it made no difference how many workers had been
involved in a certain stage of production --- it was only their output that
counted. At times when the demand for labour increased more rapidly
than the supply --- as in the last decade of the nineteenth century when an
epidemic of bubonic plague made skilled labour scarce in the city --- the
employers were forced to abandon piecemeal wages in favour of a daily
rate.

>There was an open bidding for workers at street corners. ... wages rose and a
system of daily payment came into vogue. (S.D. Mehta quoted in Majmundar
1973: 6)

But the factory owners succeeded in resisting this pressure by establishing
a common front and reaching agreement among themselves on
where and how to fix the level of wages. The labour problem, as it was
called, was a direct and main cause of the founding of the employers'
association in 1891. It could hardly have been a coincidence that wages
were considerably reduced in that same year. For many decades, wages
remained based on a combination of piecemeal and time-based wages. In
addition, if weavers made mistakes during the production process, their
wages were docked.

>At the end of a day's work the worker was required to go out and sell damaged
cloth in the open market. In doing so at times he not only lost his wages, but was
also called upon to add something from his own pocket to compensate the mill
for the damage to the cloth. (Majmundar 1973: 128)

Because the wages from the mill were not enough to maintain a wife and
children, they too had to engage themselves in the industrial process.
Low-caste Hindu women who had gained experience of hand spinning
at home, either in the country or in the city, now did the same work in
the mill, or did other work in the preparatory stages when the raw cotton
is processed into yarn. Their wages were lower than those of the men.
Muslim women were spared the factory regime, because of the taboo on
working outside the home. There were also very few women from the
intermediate and higher Hindu castes, whose presence on the shopfloor
was seen as a violation of the strict rules of virtuous conduct expected of
them. In addition, the crudeness imposed by the industrial climate was
incompatible with their strict sexual morals. Jobbers in particular were
accustomed to take all kinds of liberties with female workers, in and
outside working hours and irrespective of whether they were married or
single. Low-caste mothers brought infants who still had to be breastfed
to the mill, where they were kept quiet the whole day with doses of
opium (Shah 1990: 448). Restricting these excesses was one of the
reasons for the early industrial labour legislation introduced by the
colonial administration before the turn of the century. The 1891 Factory
Act prescribed that women should work no longer than 11 hours a day.
The women themselves responded by submitting a petition to the city
authorities to prevent the new measures from coming into force. A
shorter working day not only meant that they earned less, but that they
no longer qualified for the skilled jobs they had held until then in various
departments. The protest was in vain. Their percentage of the working
population declined to a seventh part of the total, and they were only
eligible for work in the early stages of the production process, performing
tasks that required little or no training and which the men refused to
do.

Child labour, too, was widespread in the modern textile industry in
Ahmedabad, more so than in Bombay and to only a lightly lesser extent
than female labour. Their size and small fingers made children especially
suitable for work on certain mechanical operations. Boys in particular
were employed as 'doffers'. They were paid far less than adults and they
were much less able to resist the way in which they were employed. There
was no question of them going to school. The mill owners rejected any
responsibility for educating the children of their employees, while the
parents themselves could not afford to release them from gainful employment.
Taking the children along to the mill from an early age was
not a difficult choice, given the sustained state of deficiency in which the
majority of working-class households lived.

>Unable to make both ends meet on their paltry income, parents used to wake up
their children at dawn either by sprinkling water on their faces, or by beating
them if they refused to rise, and sent them to work in mills. Many parents were
forced by economic considerations to extract a full day's work from sons already
at tender age. Since the Factories Act (1891) had reduced the employment of
boys between 9 and 12 years old to half a day, they were made to work in two
different mills to circumvent the restriction. (Majmundar 1973: 126)

Here, too, measures aimed at curbing an excess, in this case child labour,
had the reverse effect. An 1881 law reducing children's working day to a
maximum of six hours was intended to put an end to the practice of
making boys between seven and 12 years old work up to nine hours a
day. This improvement actually meant that these 'half-timers' were
forced, after finishing their work at the end of the morning, to go to a
second mill where they were registered under a different name, to work
another long shift until the evening. They would then come home, faint
from hard work and from exhaustion (Shah 1990: 445--6). The gradual
shift in favour of male workers, also for jobs which had largely been
performed by women and children, resulted in the numbers of women
and children in mills declining in Ahmedabad. In 1921, however, they
still constituted a significant minority, as the following figures show:
men accounted for 72%, women for 15% and children for
13%.

Production in the mills was split up into a number of different
activities which, as already mentioned, were often divided between the
workers along caste and religious lines. This, together with the strong ties
to the jobber-cum gang boss, meant that transfers from one department
to another were rare. The job for which a worker was trained therefore
changed little, if at all, over the years. Joining another enterprise, which
was common in the period of rapid industrial expansion, did not result
in a break in this pattern, since the work in the new factory was usually
the same as before, often under the same foreman. The organization of
the labour process was highly segmented horizontally, with little vertical
differentiation. Practically the only promotion the workers could achieve
was the conversion of their temporary contract into a permanent one, if
they met the requirements. In very exceptional cases, they might make it
to the rank of jobber, but that was as far as it went even for the small
minority who got that far. The advanced compartmentalization that was
inherent in this flat industrial landscape was accompanied by varying
wage levels between the different tasks. In addition, the fact that pay was
based on the work done rather than on the time it took to do it, meant
that the income of workers doing the same jobs also often varied widely.

Chandavarkar rightly pointed out that the mill owners in Bombay
displayed little commitment to progressive mechanization (1994: 81--2).
Textile production was by no means capital intensive and the employers
showed no appetite for technological innovation. This reluctance was
largely the result of the consistently low cost of labour. This observation
leads Chandavarkar to conclude that there was a clear resemblance to the
organization of petty commodity production in the informal sector.
Chandavarkar's argument, based on the nature of artisan manufacture,
led Gooptu to the radical conclusion --- in her study of the urban poor at
the beginning of the twentieth century in British India --- that there was
no real distinction between the labour force in the formal and the
informal sectors of the economy. She claimed that this mass of workers
circulated, as casual labourers, among a large number and diversity of
workplaces.

> ... the supply of labour was not rigidly demarcated along the lines of organised,
formal sector, permanent workers on the one hand, and the informal, unorganised
sector, casual labourers on the other. The urban labour market was, in fact,
largely integrated, and the strategies of labour deployment by employers did not
vary significantly between the so-called formal and informal sectors. Both
tended to rely on casual labour whenever possible. Apart from a small core of
skilled, permanent labour employed by the mills, the pool of labour supply for
the two sectors was, to a large extent unified. (Gooptu 2001: 50)

I would not go that far. No doubt, in contrast to the image of a
dichotomized urban economy, I have proffered in previous publications
the alternative of a sliding continuum between formal and informal
sector employment. This does not alter the fact that, in my opinion, the
arrival and expansion of factory production brought about a real shift in
the pattern of employment. Despite the fluctuations that continued to
occur in the production process and the stubborn insistence of the
captains of industry to invest as little as possible in the quality of the
workforce, an industrial vanguard did gradually emerge which felt an
affinity with the factory work on which their survival depended. No
matter how heavy the labour regime was, or how meagre the pay the
workforce received for long hours of work, the balance of costs and
benefits was such that the textile barons had no difficulty in finding
enough people to work in the mills. Their willingness or even eagerness
to be recruited can be explained by the fact that the wages tended to be
higher than those of farm labourers or of workers in the _bazar_ economy.
This applied not only to Ahmedabad in the early industrial period (Shah
1990: 443, 449--50), but also to other cities in which the new industrial
economy was emerging. For example. Murphy tells us that, in Madras:

> ... when compared with the landless rural laborers, or with non-industrial
working groups in the city, such as hand-cart men, rickshaw-wallahs or casual
laborers, the mill workers' pay, working conditions, welfare benefits and general
standard of living were comparatively high (Murphy 1981: 41)

Given what has already been discussed above, it should be clear that
the statement comparatively high' has to be seen in the light of the
extremely degraded level of subsistence of the working population as a
whole. I hesitate to describe the transition of the first generation of mill
workers to an industrial working regime and the effect of that on their
daily lives as an improvement. To define it in this way would not do
sufficient justice to the new forms of subjugation and exploitation to
which they became exposed. In my view, the fact that they were
effectively guaranteed work every day distinguishes them from the
footloose army that populated the informal sector of the economy. But
this must be seen in perspective. Chandavarkar (1994: 82) refers to
reports which state --- that not only at the end of the nineteenth century,
but also as late as the 1930s --- around a third of the workers in the textile
industry did not have permanent contracts but were hired on a daily or
provisional basis. I should add here that the use of the term casual labour
in the context of the mills did not mean that these workers had to look
for work from day to day in whatever arena or sector of the economy
they could find it. In the cotton mills, the casual workers were a pool of
reserve workers who had to be permanently available and who were put
to work, mostly in jobs which required no or less skill, without enjoying
the advantages of a permanent contract. The prospect of a contract was
in fact their reward for turning up regularly at the factory gates to do
casual --- and therefore lower-paid --- work. Promotion to the status of a
permanent worker offered them the security of a higher wage which had
been denied to them until then. Given the fact that work in the informal
sector paid even more poorly and was even less predictable and regular,
it is unlikely that most of those who managed to gain access to mill
employment --- no matter how temporary it may have been at first ---
would give it up. The rotation of workers between the textile mills
would have been more common than a constant coming and going of
casual labourers to operate the machines in the spinning and weaving
shops. Nevertheless, even this conclusion needs to be qualified. The
margins for selling one's labour power were probably more fluid in the
_bazar_ economy than in the factories. Besides, not every male or female
worker may have been able to withstand the miserable conditions and
the extremely long working days. The physical and mental wear and tear
undoubtedly took its toll and must have caused many to leave the mills
prematurely, perhaps even after a very short time. The literature and the
records are silent on the fate of these worn-out men, women, and
children. Did their failing health force them to leave the labour market
entirely, or did they find their way back to the informal sector?

The distinction between work in the formal sector and in the informal
sector is not absolute. But excessive emphasis on the similarities runs
the risk of denying the real differences that did arise between factorized
and non-factorized work regimes. I have already mentioned the measures
taken by the colonial administration against child and female labour.
Was this early industrial legislation introduced to protect these extra
vulnerable groups among the working population? In answering this
question it should not be forgotten that the regulations did not extend to
the informal sector, which was of course far greater than the emerging
formal sector. In addition, the literature makes it very clear that the early
legislation was primarily intended to protect the industry in the mother
country --- more specifically the textile industry in Lancashire. Another
explanation that I would like to draw attention to is the notion, popular
in the early colonial administration and among capitalist employers, that
the habitus of local labour was not suitable for participation in modern
economic production. There is a natural tendency to interpret the
introduction of industrial legislation as an expression of what was known
as the 'social problem'. The desire to improve the lot of the working
population, and the articulation of this desire in the form of collective
action, is seen as a major incentive for introducing regulations aimed at
achieving a greater equilibrium between capital and labour. Perhaps this
explanation is offered with the benefit of hindsight, and is grounded in
an emancipatory perspective that only emerged at a later stage and was
then applied to this earlier phase of industrialization. Rather than
adopting this popular interpretation of early industrial legislation as an
encouraging first step towards improving the lot of the working population,
I tend to see it in a different light: as part of a strategy to harness
labour to the discipline of modern industrial capitalism. This was very
clearly expressed in the first code of conduct imposed on colonial labour,
the Employers and Workmen (Disputes) Act of 1860. This Act was
based on the belief that the use of legal force was indispensable for
(European) employers to ensure that their employees complied with the
conditions of their employment. As the final report of the Royal Commission
on Indian Labour (1931: 337) states, the 1860 Act remained the
only official procedure for settling labour disputes until 1929. It was a
one-sided code, which assumed the reluctance or even bad faith of those
who committed themselves to work for the employers in the modern
sector. From the middle of the nineteenth century, the mobilization of
the working population in those parts of the colonial economy which
were run along capitalist lines was grounded on the assumption that the
contracted workers lacked the discipline required to perform the task
required of them. Experience had shown that, as far as the time, nature,
duration, and recompense for the work they had to perform was concerned,
they refused to surrender themselves to the mercy of their
employers.

Was this refusal based on a desire to adhere to employment practices
customary in the _bazar_ economy? In the literature, the difference between
these two modalities of employment is focused on the distinction
drawn by Thompson between the task-oriented nature of work in the
pre-industrial context and the 'clock-time' typical of the modern industrial
regime (Thompson 1991). Parry and others have expressed their
doubts about the validity of this distinction (Parry 1999: 108--10),
rightly in my view. The lack of regularity and punctuality which the
factory owners complained about so vociferously had much to do with a
reluctance to be subjected to an organization of work of which timediscipline
was anything but an overriding feature. It was grounded in the
resistance to a form of production in which employers treated labour
little differently from the machines they had installed in their factories.
Labour was a commodity, a means of production which they could use
as they saw fit --- indifferently, haphazardly, and intermittently --- with no
obligations and with little concern for the welfare of the workers themselves.
The intervention of the colonial administration was necessary not
so much to ensure that a sufficient numbers of workers could be
attracted from the colonized economy --- usually the payment of advances
and the deployment of brokers to take care of recruitment was
enough to assure that --- but to bind them to the rules of the new
production process. Among the various strategies employed by the
employers were sanctions on workers who were slow or unwilling to
internalize the new industrial discipline. If weavers made mistakes, their
pay was reduced. The foreman would not accept any faulty material
from them. They would not be paid for the bad work and had to procure
it themselves. A song describes how they tried to sell the inferior quality
cloth after their return from the mills in the evening:

>Magane bhave mariyun vechun, petiyun mage kaya
>
>Akha dinano mila majuriyo kapada sanje khapavava
>
>Pherio banine serie bhatakun, lyo koi dinadayala
>
>Kapada lesoji, koi kapada lesoji
>
>\[Come, buy of me, come; come buy, come buy
>
>Buy lads, or else your lasses cry, come buy of me,
>
>Of one who has toiled for the whole day long
>
>And who has draped around my body in the streets
>
>To sell my share of cloth lest the wolf at the door draw too near,
>
>Come my generous lords, come buy of me, come buy.
>
>(Majmundar 1973: 128)\]

Until well into the twentieth century, the industrialists complained
about the reluctance of their workers to comply with the conditions of
their employment contracts, which demanded punctuality, regularity,
loyalty, obedience and, more generally, acceptance of their state of
captivity. What employers actually wanted was that anyone who came to
work at the mills surrendered the margins for exploiting their labour
power that had existed (and continued to exist) in the _bazar_ economy.
These margins related primarily to multiple strategies for finding work
and negotiating with those who provided it on the level of pay (which
depended on the season), the nature of the payment (in money, in kind,
or a combination of the two) and the time at which payment was
received (in advance of or after the work had been performed). The
debate on the lack of commitment of the industrial worker which
continued until after the mid-twentieth century must be seen against the
background of these different modalities (_see also_ Breman 1999: 4--12).
My conclusion is that the early colonial industrial legislation did not
arise from a desire to curb the excesses of the new industrial regime, but
to tie the workers to its rhythm and ensure that they adapted to its
demands. The mobilization of this army was intended to lead to a work
regime in which they were thoroughly immobilized.

### Living in Squalor

Equally miserable as the conditions under which the first generation of
mill workers had to work were the circumstances in which they were
forced to live. The newcomers to the city built their own shelters,
initially from clay with a thatched roof, on open wasteland outside the
old city and as close as possible to the place where they were corralled for
at least twelve hours a day. They had to survive in these hutments for
many years without even the most elementary facilities, such as paved
roads, sewers, a water supply, refuse collection, or public lighting. The
population of these sprawling settlements, known as _wadas_, was divided
up according to caste and religion. The segregation according to social
identity that existed within the mill walls was thus duplicated outside. In
1911, Ahmedabad had a population of nearly 214,000, a rise of more
than 80% compared to 40 years ago. This increase was almost
entirely due to the textile industry, which quickly began to leave a clear
mark on the city's economy. So much so that, in the first decades of the
twentieth century, Ahmedabad acquired a reputation as the Manchester
of India. The industrial districts, where work and everyday life overlapped,
remained concentrated on the left bank of the Sabarmati river,
forming a semi-circle around the walled city. The new neighbourhoods
grew up around village localities on the eastern outskirts and were named
after them. The first bridge to the right bank of the river, to which the
economic centre of gravity would shift in the second half of the twentieth
century, was already built in 1870 but there was no construction on the
opposite side until 1902. The early migrants from the hinterland, who
had initially settled in empty spaces inside the city walls, were driven out
to the suburbs, where more and more factories were being built. From
the very start, these neighbourhoods looked like slums and they accounted
for the large majority of the 84,375 dwellings in Ahmedabad in 1911. The jerry-built housing in this part of the city --- most of the
dwellings were simple huts --- was marked by a high degree of poverty,
together with the defects that such a state of deprivation inevitably
entails. The following account, pertaining to the early twentieth century,
clearly shows the level of misery the inhabitants had to endure:

>Normally the worker and his family resided in a room ten feet long and eight feet
>broad. Its walls made of clay were black like coal with dirt enveloping them. The
>entrance to the room was so small and low that a tall man might have to bend low
>to negotiate himself through it. One corner of the room was utilised as a kitchen.
>In another corner clothes and utensils of clay and metal, both of them dirtiness
>incarnate, could be found in disorder. The clay container of water used to be very
>shabby and even its outside was covered with dirt and dust. The routine of the
>dinner of the worker could be described thus. The male kept the 'dal' (pulses
>soup) and vegetables in metal utensils and the _chapati_ on a piece of paper or on
>the floor and grubbed them. Children went out of the room with _chapatis_ in
>hands, sat on a dingy bed and masticated them. The dinner ceremony of women
>was not more orderly and civilized than that of their children. On account of the
>scarcity of time, cleansing utensils was an unnecessary and luxurious affair. _Inter
>alia_ due to the scarcity of water children did not have a bath for months. For
>weeks continuously the women also did not bathe themselves until the agitation
>of lice in their long hair compelled them to do so and to apply some castor oil to
>it. Many ladies used to have only one pair of _sarees_ and a petticoat to put on and
>they used to wash them conveniently once in a month. The tenement of a
>worker, usually consisting of one room only, was lighted with a kerosene lamp
>emitting more smoke than light.
>
>Bonds of family were loose. The worker used to spend a sizable sum of his
>income on liquor. His wife used to spend money on purchasing sweets and
>eating them in the market itself. It is not difficult to imagine what a negligible
>portion of the income of the family the worker must be spending on looking
>after his children. A large part of the income of the family was spent on wine, the
>payment of interest on debt and snacks in the bazaar. The income of the family
>was even otherwise low. Further, very little of it was available for running the
>house. And therefore more often than not quarrels used to flare up between the
>worker and his wife. (Majmundar 1973: 129--30)

Around the turn of the century, the mill owners, who initially
accepted no responsibility at all for housing their workers, started to
build _chalis_, or _chawls_ (walk-throughs). These were narrow, dead-end
alleyways lined with one or two-room dwellings, which the workers
could rent at a low rate. In 1899, the city authorities also started
providing factory workers with these kinds of houses, as part of a
building plan that closely resembled the 'coolie lines' constructed on
plantations and in mining enclaves. These single-storey barrack-like
tenements, grouped along narrow streets around the mills, became
increasingly popular in the twentieth century and eventually dominated
the industrial districts, as they became more and more densely populated.
The inhabitants of many _chawls_ were subject to the control of the
nearby mills, not only as workers but as tenants. This extension of the
authority of the employers outside the confines of the factory gates
intensified the dependence which they believed necessary to ensure
discipline among the workers.

The bourgeoisie, although living in private comfort, had long opposed
improvement of the infrastructure in the city. They were unwilling
to pay the higher taxes this would entail, but eventually bowed to the
pressure from the authorities. Drains, refuse collection, paved streets, a
piped water supply and, much later (in 1915, ten years after the arrival of
electric lighting in the mills) electricity followed in succession (Gillion
1968: 133--40; Shah 1990: 505--15). The city budget did not, however,
extend to providing these facilities for the industrial parts of the city,
although these districts were much more densely populated and the need
was far greater. By disposing of their solid and liquid waste on the unused
land outside the factory grounds, the mills contributed to pollution of
the living environment. The effects on the health of the workers, the
deterioration they suffered as a result of the exhausting work they had to
perform, the state of malnutrition in which the whole family found itself
and, last but not least, the lack of hygiene in and around the home
explain why Ahmedabad had far higher morbidity and mortality rates
than other cities. And in the industrial neighbourhoods, these figures
were far above the already very high urban average (Gillion 1968: 151;
Lakha 1988: 93).

Besides their reluctance to provide housing and health care, the mill
owners also had no desire to be held responsible for increasing the quality
of labour by providing education. This was an extension of the indifference
of the bourgeoisie to social security or care arrangements. In 1866,
during a visit to Ahmedabad, an English reformer described the situation
as follows:

>The inferior portion of the population is quite untouched by any educational
institution; they do not feel the want of education for their children, and the
higher classes do not appear to feel any sympathy for them, as in our own
country. A deep impassable gulf is between the different classes, arising chiefly
from caste distinctions; never did I notice any friendly recognition of the lower
by the higher nor hear of any effort being made to do them good or elevate their
condition. When I urged upon a native gentleman the duty of trying to do
something to diminish the ignorance of those who constitute the largest portion
of the population, he replied 'We have enough to do at present with the
education of our own class, without thinking of these.' (Carpenter 1868: 47)

The municipality did not consider it necessary to apply pressure to
change this situation. The Ahmedabad Collector confirmed to the
Factory Commission in 1908 that the working masses in the mills were
illiterate. He saw no reason why the employers should do anything to
change this situation. There was after all no point in sending children to
school who were destined to spend their whole lives working in the mills.
Of course, those living in the better-off parts of the city were aware of the
misery that prevailed in the industrial districts. But the bourgeois view of
this social problem was coloured more by contempt than by concern.
The popular opinion was that these people earned more than enough to
live on. The fact that the majority of the households were in a permanent
state of debt was the result of uneconomical behaviour: the spendthrift
conduct that was particularly prevalent among Muslims and the excessive
drinking habits typical of both men and women of the lower Hindu
castes. This, and not the inadequate income from factory work, was the
real cause of their bad health. The much-vaunted claim that poverty was
caused by nothing more than a lack of discipline was shared by 'expert'
witnesses from the employers' side in their testimonies to the Factory
Labour Commission:

>He is the best paid coolie and but for the ruin brought by drinking and reckless
expenditure on pay days, he would be richer, healthier and happier by far than
the middle-class man of India. (1908, vol. II: 17)

Those in the worst condition among the formal sector workers were
undoubtedly the members of the untouchable castes who had obtained
employment in the mills during the expansion of the textile industry.
They populated the lowest rungs on the ladder, where training was
minimal and the pay was lowest. The arrival especially of _Dheds_ and
_Vankars_ from far and wide was a consequence of the rapid loss of
importance of their traditional profession of hand-weaving towards the
end of the nineteenth century. A large strike in 1895, in which more than
8,000 mill workers took part, perhaps provided them --- as members of
the untouchable and scheduled castes --- with the opportunity to join this
vanguard of the working class. The story goes that they offered their
services as strikebreakers (Shah 1990: 358). The marginalization of these
newcomers in the mills was reflected in the same pattern of segregation
in the residential districts. They were housed in separate _wadas_ to ensure
that they did not pollute the wells from which the other castes fetched
their water. Although they worshipped Hindu gods and a section of
them were devotees of sects like the Swaminarayan and Kabirpanth, they
were forbidden to visit the temples. It is not improbable that reform
movements among the lower castes to give them greater respectability in
the Hindu hierarchy may have led to the untouchables being even more
ostracized in public. In 1873 the local press, as the mouthpiece of the
urban middle class, protested at the opening of train carriages to all
Hindus irrespective of their identity, and in 1899, the residents of the
Gomtipur district opposed the admission of _Dhed_ children to the public
school. A social reformer who opened a school for the poor in Dariapur
in 1907 (only for boys, by the way) accepted Muslim pupils but not the
children of untouchable families. The civilization campaign, intended as
a programme of self-purification to encourage compliance with 'higher'
Hindu values, also had an impact on the groups that suffered the most
from discrimination. In 1909, the _Dhed Sabha_ was set up to abolish
practices that led to widespread stigmatization, such as drinking alcohol
and eating meat. The ensuing taboo on accepting food left over from the
festivities of higher castes was inspired by a resistance to the public show
of inferiority that this ritual implied. Such displays of emancipatory
sentiment, however, had little effect on the prejudices of the better-off
classes in Ahmedabad towards those less privileged than themselves
(Shah 1990: 348--56). The essence of this ideology was a desire to
preserve --- in the new social order that was emerging with the restructuring
of the urban economy --- the state of subordination of the working
people as a whole and the untouchables in particular. By and large these
subaltern castes stuck to their non-vegetarian diet and this food preference,
actually, facilitated their settling down in mill neighbourhoods
where Muslims also came to live.

### The Early Struggle for Emancipation

The lack of regularity and commitment to work, said to be a characteristic
feature of individual behaviour of the factory workers, was also
reflected in their tendency to escape from the rigid discipline imposed on
them through bouts of collective action. The literature and the records
have little to say about the nature of early industrial agitation, its causes
and effects. A strike in 1878, the first ever recorded in this new branch of
industry, was intended to bring about the dismissal of a _Dhed_ who had
claimed to be a _Marwari_. This incident confirms that, at this early stage
of industrial employment, members of the untouchable castes were not
permitted to work in the mills. However, strikes and other forms of
industrial unrest were usually the result of dissatisfaction with working
conditions. Unlike in the _bazar_ economy --- in which it was more difficult
to present a united front because the work was spread among a large
number of employers and locations, and was subject to strong market
fluctuations and the cyclical nature of seasonal peaks and slacks --- the
concentration of workers in the same and large-scale sites of work
combined with the growing social awareness of a common subjugation
to the mill owner or his managers encouraged attempts to improve the
situation by articulating mutual solidarity. The unrest, known as _hullad_,
always broke out unexpectedly and was usually restricted to an individual
department or mill, but would sometimes unleash a wave of
resistance that swept through all the industrial districts and could even
disrupt the economic life of the entire city.

>Amongst the workers there was a specific technique for starting it. As a symbol
(n.b. a metal disc or other token) was circulated amongst workers they gave up
work and assembled on the bank of the 'Chandola' tank. As symbols of feminine
cowardice packets of long hair and bangles were sent to non-striking workers.
Officers of the mill or mills in which the _hullad_ occurred went to the Chandola
tank to persuade strikers to resume work. Sometimes they took to their heels on
perceiving these officers. Sometimes negotiations ensued between the leaders of
strikers and these officers and as strikers' demands were accepted they resumed
work. Sometimes those who led workers during the _hullad_ were victimised when
the situation became normal. The _hullad_ was so much dreaded by the citizens of
Ahmedabad that no sooner did it come to be known that it had occurred than
the shopkeepers would close their shops and go home. An instance is on record
that the military had to be called in to disband workers who had created the riot.
In the _hullad_ which took place some time before 1914, workers had broken the
pans of a mill. (Majmundar 1973: 129)

The frequency of petty disputes --- for example, the demand for the
dismissal of a particularly despotic _mukadam_ or a jobber who mobilized
his gang to obtain recognition for a specific demand or grievance --- have
not been preserved in the records. As a consequence the picture of the
way in which the first generations of workers resisted the industrial
regime is both understated and distorted. The large strikes were not
always aimed at achieving pay rises or other improvements in working
conditions, but also broke out in protest at measures announced by the
employers which were seen as making the situation worse. An example of
the latter is the protest by women in 1891, when they were threatened
with dismissal as a result of the new regulations restricting their working
hours. A year later, there was further unrest after the announcement of a
10--15% cut in wages. In 1895, there was a major strike when the
employers switched from a system of weekly payment to twice a month.
And in 1899, the mills were forced to close their gates again after the
owners had taken advantage of an influx of new workers from Rajasthan
and Saurasthra, where there was a famine, to announce a new round of
wage cuts (Lakha 1988: 99--101; Shah 1990; 454--9). It seems probable
that the founding of the Ahmedabad Millowners Association in 1891
was both the cause and effect of the growing labour agitation at the end
of the nineteenth century. For their part, the workers were often unable
to close ranks to defend their common interests. They may have been
united by a common bond, as some commentators from that period
claim, but without the benefit of coordination on an established and
representative platform, the industrial action this inspired was usually
unsuccessful.

The eighteenth session of the Indian National Congress was held in
Ahmedabad in 1902 at the invitation of the captains of industry. They
could see that the economic programme of the nationalist movement
served the interests of the country's bourgeoisie. The same applied to the
_swadeshi_ campaign, launched shortly after to encourage people to buy
goods produced in India. The champions of liberation from colonial
domination understood that their struggle could only succeed if they
mobilized the support of the mass of the people. This led in 1906 to the
formation of the _Swadeshi_ Mitra Mandal in the city. Its activities included
evening classes for mill workers, during which small initial steps
were taken towards increasing the awareness of this industrial vanguard.
The initiative indicates the gradually emerging understanding among
the bourgeoisie that the struggle for national independence would have
to be accompanied by social reform. Anasuyaben Sarabhai, the sister of
one of the leading industrial magnates in the city, was a prominent
advocate of this school of thought. Not wishing to spend her life, after
her marriage, with an illiterate man, she left for England, with her
brother's consent. During her two-year stay in London, she studied at
the London School of Economics. She also came in contact with the
Fabian Society and its ideas on reform and social work. On her return to
Ahmedabad, she and a childhood friend aimed to provide schooling for
middle-class women. When nothing came of the plan, because of lack of
cooperation from this conservative milieu, Anasuyaben shifted her attention
to improving the lot of the working classes. In 1914, Ambalal
Sarabhai gave his sister permission to set up a school for the children of
the mill workers in a _chawl_ which he owned and which was located close
to one of his mills. Together with other young reformers of bourgeois
background, such as Shankarlal Banker, Anasuyaben was one of the
initiators of the _Majoor Mitra Mandal_ (Friends of Labourers Society) in
1916, which gave this form of social work a considerable boost. In
addition to educational activities, including evening classes for adults,
this group of idealistic volunteers also devoted themselves to improving
the home hygiene and health care of the mill workers, and opened a
clinic to this end. They tried to alleviate the debt problems of the
industrial poor by encouraging cooperative credit facilities (Majmundar
1973: 76--7). In 1917 Banker, who had become very familiar with the
working class milieu as a social worker, calculated the average family
budget and reached the conclusion that the total of all necessary expenses
was higher than the household's earnings. With a maximum
monthly income of 22 rupees, expenses for food and clothing for a man,
woman, and children amounted to nearly 25 rupees. In his calculations
Banker had taken no account of medical expenses, the costs of rites of
passage like births, marriages and deaths, or the payment of interest or
repayment of loans taken out to finance these recurrent events (Kamath
and Kher 1993: 63--5).

Such experiences and records also helped to increase the social awareness
of the activists themselves, including Anasuyaben, as is shown by
memories she recounted many years later to an audience of workers:

>I opened a small school in Amarpura for teaching your children. Working
>among you I began to understand your dreadful condition. The picture of men
>and women making their way home after working for 24 to 36 hours in the mill
>is still vivid before my eyes. Even small children were compelled to work for 12
>hours then!
>
>We noticed before us emaciated and despondent children, their bodies naked
>and covered with dirt and unkempt hair. We commenced our work in right
>earnest. We would bathe and comb their hair after applying oil when innumerable
>lice would come out. While carrying out the washing of hair we used to
>wear an apron. We got clothes stitched from our curtains in our home-and
>thus a small beginning was made. (in Kamath and Kher 1993: 60--1)

From this dismal start the struggle for upliftment became organized
on a regular and institutional footing.
