_Land acquisition in the name of building industry in Singur and
Nandigram in West Bengal has seen popular opposition from
various political entities and intellectuals. However, such
opposition was lacking in earlier cases of acquisition of fertile land
ostensibly for industrial development of the state. Despite the lack
of such support from civil society and the polity, the people affected
still protested to ensure compensation._

> This is how forced displacement becomes
cultural-economic equivalent of an earthquake
that shatters production systems
and social networks, undermines identity,
and plunges those affected on a downward
poverty spiral.
>
> --- Michael Cernea (2002).

The peasant protests in Singur and
Nandigram, hitherto little known
places, have been able to draw the
attention of the national and international
media, the leading economists and intellectuals
of the country, human rights
activists and above all, politicians. But if
we take a longer view of events involving
land acquisition for private industries, we
will find that worse things had happened
in Kharagpur during the early 1990s, a
few years before the declaration of the
"New Industrial Policy" (NIP) by the Left
Front Government (LFG) in 1994. Kolkata-based
scientists and intellectuals who
are now protesting against the acquisition
of fertile agricultural land for Tata Motors
at Singur, did not pay any heed to the
dispossession of thousands of small and
marginal farmers and _bargadars_ (including
tribals) for the pig-iron companies of the
Tatas and Birlas at Kharagpur.

The opposition parties, too, were silent.
No opposition leader raised his or her
voice in the West Bengal assembly on the
acquisition of farmland for private companies
at Kharagpur. The report on the
adverse consequences of land acquisition
was published in the media, particularly,
_The Statesman_, yet the intellectuals remained
silent. The reasons behind the
silence of Kolkata-based intellectuals and
the opposition parties over the land acquisition
for the Tatas and Birlas by the
LFG at Kharagpur in the early 1990s are
more than one. First, anti-Left Front
political parties (the SUCI and CPI-ML)
and human rights groups (APDR and
Nagarik Mancha) were not interested in
the land acquisition issue during that
period when the Left Front-driven industrialisation
was at its nascent stage, with
promises of huge industrial investments
by private companies in the state. The
other partners of the LFG, viz. CPI, Forward
Bloc and RSP were also silent on
the acquisition of farmland in a district
in which the majority of the population
depends on agriculture. Undoubtedly, these
pressure groups lacked the political foresight
to take it up as their major agenda
for agitation. Second, though the farmlands
acquired in Kharagpur provided food
security to a good number of villagers,
these were monocrop ('jal soem' in the
departmental classification) in nature. We
still find among those who are opposed
to the acquisition of multicrop farmlands
an understanding which runs like this:
"Well, monocrop land may be acquired
since we need to have industrialisation in
the state, but multicrop land should
never be allowed to be acquired for nonagricultural
use". This argument defies
logic, because the assumption is that where
monocrop land is cultivated people will
benefit if industrialisation occurs there.
Third, despite the spontaneous but weak
protests and resistance by farmers of
Kharagpur during the mid-1990s, no opposition
party lent any solid support (as
they have done in Singur) to them.
A comparative study between the
cases of land acquisition in Singur and
Kharagpur is thus required. According to
information revealed in the print media,
a total of 997 acres of agricultural land
have been acquired for the Tatas' small
car factory at Singur. The process of land
acquisition by the bureaucratic machinery
of the West Bengal government took eight
months. The compensation rate, according
to government sources, turned out to be
a little more than Rs 7 lakh per acre (_The
Statesman_, December 14, 2006).

In 1992, a pig-iron manufacturing plant
named Tata Metaliks was set up on
monocrop land of six '_mouzas_'[^mouza] under
Kharagpur I block of the erstwhile Midnapore
district, though non-arable land
was available in the vicinity, having communication
and other facilities. A total of
217.23 acres was acquired by the state
government and the acquisition was complete
within a year through the application
of the more coercive West Bengal Land
(Requisition and Acquisition) Act, 1948
which became defunct after March 31, 1993.
The compensation paid by the
district land acquisition department was
Rs 20,686 an acre for a landowner, while
for a recorded _bargadar_, it was Rs 11,211.75
an acre. On June 1, 1992 in the West
Bengal assembly, Manas Bhunia of the
Congress wanted to know about the land
acquisition for the establishment of the
pig-iron industry by the Tatas at Kharagpur.
The land and land reforms minister
in his reply informed the assembly about
the amount of land given to the company
and the rates of compensation. No question
was asked about the rehabilitation of
the displaced peasants by any member of
the assembly (West Bengal Assembly
Proceedings, Vol 99; 1992). An unpublished
report of the Midnapore land acquisition
department dated March 27, 1992 revealed
that the lack of irrigation facilities and
the monocrop nature of the acquired land
led to the calculation of its market price
at such a low rate \[Land Acquisition
Department 1992\]. The department, too,
did not explore the possibilities of rehabilitation
of the affected families in terms
of providing permanent jobs and/or land
as compensation. The administration
seemed to be concerned only with monetary
compensation at the market price
prevalent in the area. Three years later,
people of the same area were served with
notices by the district administration for
the acquisition of their farmland in 10
_mouzas_ covering about 525 acres for
another pig-iron plant named Century
Textiles and Industrial Limited (CTIL).

[^mouza]: In Bangladesh, Pakistan and parts of India a _Mouza_ or _Mauza_ is a type of administrative district, corresponding to a specific land area within which there may be one or more settlements. Before the 20th century, the term referred to a revenue collection unit in a revenue district.

The local people, being totally disillusioned
and frustrated with the government's
attitude towards rehabilitation and compensation
in the Tata Metaliks case, began
to protest against this decision of acquisition.
This time, the land acquisition department
prepared rates of compensation,
which ranged between Rs 50,000 and
Rs 1,00,000 an acre and Rs 7,000 an acre
for the _bargadars_. The farmers objected to
these rates and mass deputations to the
district authorities began, and on January
10, 1996, the peasants prevented soil testing
by the company and blocked National
Highway 6 for eight hours. The farmers'
agitation continued for about five months
and they also boycotted parliamentary
elections in May 1996. All these events
were reported in _The Statesman_ and some
Bengali dailies. No political party came
forward to organise this spontaneous movement
of peasants; no social or human rights
activist came forward to support land losers
of a rural area in West Bengal, just
120 km from Kolkata. One former naxalite
peasant leader, with the help of a few local
Indian National Trade Union Congress
(INTUC) members, led a brief but significant
movement against land acquisition.
The district unit of the Association for Protection of Democratic Rights (APDR) published a
leaflet, held a meeting in the locality and
sent a deputation to the district magistrate,
but that was all. The land acquisition episode
for CTIL, however, took a horrible
turn within a few years. After taking possession
of 358.25 acres by April 1997 and
fencing the land, the company decided not
to deposit any money for payment of
compensation \[Guha 2004\]. The company's
managing director, B K Birla, in an interview
with _The Statesman_, said they would
not proceed with the project since "the
national market of pig-iron has become
very competitive because of the entry of
China and Australia in the field". The then
state land and land reforms minister, Surya
Kanta Mishra, on the other hand told
_The Statesman_: "We are not finding any
takers for the land" (_The Statesman_, November
18, 1999). This huge chunk of fertile
agricultural land, which provided subsistence
to nearly 3,000 families, remained unutilised
till 2003 after which some portion of
it was given to a private company but the
larger area still remains unutilised. According
to the survey conducted by the Kharagpur
I block development office, 73 per cent
of families of the gram panchayats from
which land was acquired for Tata Metaliks
and CTIL were living below the poverty
line in 1997, that is, one to five years
after the acquisition \[Block Development
Office 1997\].

The current industrial policy of the LFG
is rationalised by its protagonists by the
success of its land reform measures, which
as the argument runs has improved the
conditions of the peasantry so that the
rural areas of this state can now afford
to have medium and large industries
\[WBIDC 1999\]. The land for these industries
is acquired by the colonial Land
Acquisition Act of 1894 which only has
provision for monetary compensation at
the prevalent market rate. The net effect
of this kind of development has not only
been impoverishment at the social and
economic level but also disempowerment
of the peasantry at the political level. The
all-powerful, Land Acquisition Act which
bypasses the democratically elected local
self-governments has no provision for
rehabilitation nor has the LFG shown
interest to create any kind of safety net
for the group of small peasantry which
has benefited from land reforms and includes
sharecroppers and tribals. This is
the broader context of the protests and
resistance of a group of peasants in a
region of West Bengal, who tried to create
a greater space for compensation for
the land taken over by the government in
the early 1990s. In the following sections
we would describe in some detail how
the peasants of Paschim Medinipur district
of West Bengal made attempts to manage
the risks created by the acquisition of
agricultural land for the industries through
various kinds of legal and extra-legal
means. But before we enter into the
detailed description of the peasant ways
of risk management, let us contextualise
land acquisition in West Bengal.

# Land Acquisition in West Bengal

In situations of rural poverty one of the
best safety nets is the empowerment of the
poor through land reforms which is done
through the distribution of illegally held
excess ceiling land. In the Indian context
the colonial Land Acquisition Law and the
post-independence Land Reform Act stand
in an antithetical relationship. While the
latter empowers the peasantry, the former
functions in an opposite direction; it disempowers
the peasants. And quite frustratingly,
land acquisition has taken place at a
faster pace than land reforms in left ruled
West Bengal \[Guha 2007\].

Dispossession from one's own means
of production is one kind of displacement
in which the dispossessed family not only
loses its economic security but also social
status and empowerment achieved through
political movements and land reforms.
Michael Cernea's pioneering study on
displacement has shown that impoverishment
has several 'dimensions' and the
primary among them is landlessness. According
to Cernea, landlessness is one of
the most vital components of displacement
which should be given a major importance
in devising rehabilitation resettlement and
plans. To quote Cernea: "Expropriation
of land removes the main foundation upon
which people's productive systems, commercial
activities and livelihoods are
constructed. This is the principal form of
'decapitalisation' and pauperisation for
most rural and many urban displaces, who
lose this way both natural and manmade
capital" \[Cernea 1999: 17\].

_Table 1: Distribution of Households in Five Villages Affected by Land Acquisition for Tata Metaliks_

+---------------------+----------------------+------------+
| Name of the Village | Number of Households | % of Total |
+=====================+=====================:+===========:+
| Ajabpur             | 47                   | 33.6       |
+---------------------+----------------------+------------+
| Amba                | 21                   | 14.5       |
+---------------------+----------------------+------------+
| Gokulpur            | 32                   | 22.2       |
+---------------------+----------------------+------------+
| Liluakala           | 12                   | 8.3        |
+---------------------+----------------------+------------+
| Mahespur            | 32                   | 22.2       |
+---------------------+----------------------+------------+
| Total               | 144                  | 100        |
+---------------------+----------------------+------------+

_Table 2: Distribution of Households of Different Castes and Communities Affected by Land Acquisition for TML_

+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Name of the Caste/Community | Number of Households |  Percent of Total  |
+=============================+=====================:+===================:+
| Baisnab                     | 4                    | (2.8)              |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Brahmin                     | 6                    | (4.2)              |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Kayastha                    | 13                   | (9.0)              |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Kshatriya                   | 15                   | (10.4)             |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Muslim                      | 8                    | (5.6)              |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Napit                       | 2                    | (1.4)              |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Sadgope                     | 56                   | (38.9)             |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Scheduled Castes            | 12                   | (8.3)              |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Kora (Tribe)                | 24                   | (16.7)             |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Tantubay                    | 3                    | (2.1)              |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+
| Teli                        | 1                    | (0.7)              |
+-----------------------------+----------------------+--------------------+

The second aspect of dispossession of the
farmers from their major means of production,
is the differential impact of land acquisition
on the heterogeneous group of
agriculturists in a region. This is precisely
because of the fact that when any government
acquires agricultural land it does not
take into consideration the pre-acquisition
landholding pattern of a region.

Thirdly, dispossession also entails a
political dimension. In a rural society where
peasant movements have taken place in
successive waves and the rights of sharecroppers
as well as landless labourers
have been ensured by a government just
a few years ago, the acquisition of fertile
agricultural land for capital-intensive heavy
industries by the same government not
only dispossesses the farmers economically
but it also creates political disempowerment
and despondency.

In this paper, we would briefly describe
the consequences of land acquisition for
the private industries in which all three
aforementioned risks had been observed,
viz, (i) landlessness, (ii) differential impact
of land acquisition on the peasantry, and
(iii) their political disempowerment.

# Socio-economic Consequences

The area in question lies on the bank
of the river Kasai which is the largest
river in Paschim Medinipur district. Cultivation
of paddy (staple of the district)
in the villages under study depends primarily
upon rainfall and no systematic
irrigation facilities have yet been developed
by the government. The villagers residing
on the south-eastern bank of the river
cultivate a variety of vegetables on the
land adjoining their homesteads owing to
a very good supply of groundwater tapped
through traditional dug wells. But just
west of the south-eastern railway track the
groundwater level is not very congenial
for cultivation of vegetables. The main
agricultural activity on this side of the
railway track is rain fed paddy cultivation
for about four to six months of the year.
Land for the big private industries had
been acquired by the government on this
side of the railway track during 1991--96
in the wake of liberalisation in India.

The selection procedure of the households
for this study followed a combination of
purposive and opportunity sampling. The
aim was to locate the households whose
farmlands have been acquired for the
establishment of the Tata Metaliks (TML)
unit. Instead of searching through the
records of land ownership kept in the land
and land records department of the district,
this investigation depended directly upon
fieldwork by following the traditional
anthropological method of intensive interviews
of the project affected people.
Apart from knowing the current status of
land ownership, (which are not promptly
made up-to-date in the land records office)
micro-ecological variations and local
level political movement centering round
land acquisition within the first few weeks
of fieldwork, it became possible to know
from the active members of the political
movement the names of the villages whose
inhabitants have been affected by the
acquisition of agricultural lands for the
industries. Later, at the time of conducting
the household survey, snowball sampling
was taken recourse to, wherein the affected
households gave the names of
other such household heads whose land
have also been acquired. The household
survey had to be completed within a
period of three months owing to time
constraints and as a result not all the
affected households could be covered. A
rough estimate about the total number of
households affected by the acquisition of
land was made available for us by the
leaders of the peasant movement who
took the help of the Congress Party. They
estimated that about 200 families have
been affected by the acquisition. Within
the stipulated time, a total of 144 households
(72 per cent of the estimated total)
belonging to different landholding categories,
caste and community affiliation as
well as families residing in the two microecological
niches on both sides of the
south-eastern railway track have been
covered by the survey. The sample households
included Hindu caste groups,
Muslims, tribals, owner cultivators, sharecroppers
on both sides of the railway track
which provide interesting ecological
variations in terms of groundwater level
and cultivation of non-cereal food crops.
In the following section, the findings of
enquiry on some consequences of the said
act of acquisition have been described.

The first and foremost consequence
conforms to the observation of Michael
Cernea that there are "eight major risks"
involved in involuntary displacement
caused by development projects all over
the world. Industrialisation in the liberalisation
decade in Medinipur has led to
dispossession of the small and marginal
farmers from their principal means of
production.

From Table 1 it is found that the villages
situated on the eastern side of the
railway track (Ajabpur, Gokulpur and
Liluakala) have been affected more in
terms of the number of families who have
lost their farmlands. The people of these
villages are excellent farmers who keep
themselves engaged throughout the year
in agriculture. Besides paddy, they also
grow almost all kinds of summer and
winter vegetables like green chili, lady's
finger, mustard, water gourd, pumpkin,
bitter gourd, brinjal, potato, cabbage,
cauliflower, radish and others.

These vegetables are grown in lands
adjoining their homesteads which have
not been acquired by the government. The
villagers mainly sell these vegetables in
the local markets which fetch them some
ready cash. On the other hand, the families
who live in the village Paschim Amba,
lying on the western side of the railway
track, belong to the kora tribe. Many of
the kora women and men now work as
temporary unskilled labourers in the coke
oven industry.

Table 2 shows that the households
belonging to Sadgops, who are one of the
most enterprising peasant caste of western
Bengal, have been affected most, while
the scheduled tribe and scheduled caste
families comprise almost a quarter of the
total number of affected households. An
estimate of the number of persons who
were dependent directly on agriculture
and related activities in the pre-acquisition
phase may now be attempted. Since the
mean household size in this area turned
out to be 5.76 the number of persons in
our 144 sample households would be
around 829 and through our field based
interviews and observations we have found
that all these persons were dependent on
agriculture and related economic activities
before the acquisition.

In the pre-acquisition stage, there was
no landless family within the sample
households and 75 per cent of these
families belonged to the size category of
0.5--4.5 acres. According to the latest
standards set by the government of West
Bengal, these families should be regarded
as marginal and small farmers. The pattern
of landholding among the same families
after land acquisition shows that 15 per
cent of the families have become landless
and the number of households belonging
to the lowest landholding category (≤0.5
acres) has increased from 19 to 35. On
the other hand, the number of households
within the size category 3.5--7.5 acres, has
declined from 22 to only 9. Landlessness
has another interesting dimension. The
post acquisition phase shows that the
project affected families are forced to
support bigger families with a smaller
amount of agricultural land.

It may be mentioned that even the
administrative procedures for monetary
compensation to the sharecroppers make
them more vulnerable in terms of the
amount as well as the delay towards its
payment. The new industrial policy of the
government of West Bengal did not spell
out any safety net for the sharecroppers
\[Guha 2006\].

# Utilisation of Compensation

While the policymakers of the government
think that their task of rehabilitation
ends with the payment of compensation,
the project affected families begin to
manage risk by spending the compensation
money. The following table summarises
this risk management behaviour of the
peasants in the study area.

Here we have made an attempt to
quantify the pattern of utilisation of the
compensation money received by the land
losers in the study area. It needs to be
mentioned at first that all the 144 households
have received monetary compensation,
although many losers of land during
the field investigation reported that they
were yet to get the full compensation
money. Secondly, all the families have
utilised the compensation money in more
ways than one. Eight categories of utilisation
of the compensation money by the
villagers could be identified, which were
then arranged into 10 compensation categories.
The maximum number of affected
households have spent some portion of
the compensation money on domestic
consumption, while the second largest
number of households has deposited a
part of the money in banks. But if spending
on marriage of the family members
and house-building and repair are also
considered to be domestic consumption,
then clearly the latter item predominates
in the compensation utilisation process.
In order to have a qualitative "feel" of
the impact of land acquisition in our field
area we would briefly describe the cases
of some families from Gokulpur village
in which about 22 per cent of the total
number of families have been affected by
land acquisition for the Tata Metaliks.
Here we have used the real names of the
persons with their consent.

_Case 1_: Nirod Choudhury, a middle-aged
Sadgop peasant inherited 2.5 acres of
fertile land. He used to grow paddy in
the land which supplied him food for
about six to eight months of the year. All
the land was acquired and he received
about Rs 56,000 as compensation in 1992.
He spent all the money in marrying off
his 17-year old daughter. His two sons
have dropped out from school and now
work as agricultural day labourers. Nirod-babu
now works as a helper of a mason
and buys paddy from the market.

_Case 2_: Ballav Jana, a Tanti peasant owned
three acres of agricultural land and one
acre of vegetable growing land. All his
paddy land has been acquired and he got
about Rs 66,000 as compensation which
was spent in getting his daughter married
and on domestic consumption. His one
acre of vegetable growing land which is
next to his home was not acquired and he
now sells vegetables in the local market
to maintain his family.

_Case 3_: Dhiren Choudhury, a Sadgop,
owned one acre of paddy land and all his
land have been acquired. He received
about Rs 22,000 as compensation and
purchased seven kathas of agricultural
land. He has not yet taken up any nonagricultural
job.

The above cases represent the impact
of land acquisition at the household
level in Kharagpur which clearly reveal
that the main crisis encountered by the
peasant families affected by land acquisition
was food insecurity. The compensation
money could not solve the problem.
Secondly, unless forced, these families
wanted to continue their traditional economic
pursuit, that is agriculture.

The protests launched by the landowning
peasants of the Gokulpur-Amba area
against land acquisition took many forms,
even though these did not last long. A
good number of peasants took the statutory
means to put up their objections
against land acquisition under section 5A
of the Land Acquisition Act during
December 1995. A government report
dated June 21, 1996 vividly recorded the
objections and described in detail how
the latter were overruled. The objections
submitted by the 342 peasants who lost
land contained the following points: (i)
The acquisition of agricultural land would
affect the farmers seriously by throwing
them out of employment, (ii) they would
not get compensation at the rate they
expect, and (iii) the proposed acquisition
is against public interest and is beyond
the purview of the Act. It is interesting
to observe how the concerned officials of
the land acquisition department overruled
all the objections raised by the farmers.
Before rejecting the objections, the officials,
however, recognised the severity and
magnitude of the acquisition. To quote
from the report:

>It is a fact that since large quantum of
land is being acquired and the people
chiefly subsist on agriculture many people
will be seriously affected in earning their
livelihood and avocation (Land Acquisition
Department 1996).

_Table 3A: Pre-acquisition Agricultural Landholding Pattern of Sample Households Affected by the Acquisition for TML_

+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| Size Category of Holdings (in Acres)  | Number of Households | Mean Household Size |
+=======================================+=====================:+====================:+
| Landless                              | Nil                  | --                  |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 0.5                                   | 19 (13.2)            | 4.7                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 0.5--1.5                              | 58 (40.3)            | 6.4                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 1.5--2.5                              | 32 (22.2)            | 8.8                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 2.5--3.5                              | 13 (9.0)             | 8.6                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 3.5--4.5                              | 8 (5.6)              | 8.9                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 4.5--5.5                              | 6 (4.2)              | 12.6                |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 5.5--6.5                              | Nil                  | --                  |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 6.5--7.5                              | 8 (5.6)              | 13.3                |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+

_Table 3B: Post-acquisition Agricultural Landholding Pattern of Sample Households Affected by the Acquisition for TML_

+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| Size Category of Holdings (in Acres)  | Number of Households | Mean Household Size |
+=======================================+=====================:+====================:+
| Landless                              | 22 (15.3)            | 6.4                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 0.5                                   | 35 (24.3)            | 5.5                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 0.5--1.5                              | 51 (35.4)            | 8.3                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 1.5--2.5                              | 14 (9.7)             | 7.6                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 2.5--3.5                              | 13 (9.1)             | 12.1                |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 3.5--4.5                              | 5 (3.5)              | 9.2                 |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 4.5--5.5                              | 3 (2.1)              | 10.3                |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 5.5--6.5                              | 1 (0.7)              | 15                  |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+
| 6.5--7.5                              |                      | --                  |
+---------------------------------------+----------------------+---------------------+

_Table 4: Land Acquisition Scenario among the Sharecropper Households Affected by Acquisition for TML_

+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| Amount of Land in Acres |  Number of Households |
+=========================+======================:+
| 0.5                     | 2                     |
+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| 0.5--1.5                | 8                     |
+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| 1.5--2.5                | Nil                   |
+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| 2.5--3.5                | 1                     |
+-------------------------+-----------------------+
| Total                   | 11                    |
+-------------------------+-----------------------+

But this was the only sentence in the
whole report which upheld the interests
of the peasants. The rest of the three-page
report was devoted to justifying the
acquisition through the elaboration of
some arguments. The arguments of the
officials centered around the low agricultural
yield of the lands which are
monocrop in nature. Moreover the report
also talked about the merits of the location
of the land and the important infrastructure
facilities available near by for
industry. It is learnt from the report that
during the hearing of the objections the
petitioners could not "specify their individual
difficulty in parting with the land"
although the same report said that "most
of the objectors submitted that they have
no objection if employment is assured
to them, in the company in favour of
whom acquisition is being done". Three
points raised in the report are quite significant
and show the bureaucratic way
of dealing with such an action on the
part of the government which was going
to have a severe impact on the subsistence
pattern of a group of rural cultivators in
a monocrop region. Firstly, at one place
the report mentioned: "It is worthwhile
to point out that objections have been
received only from 342 landowners for
the acquisition of 526.71 acres which
will affect at least 3,000 landowners, if
not more". It seems the official position
rested on the logic that as the overwhelming
majority of the farmers would not
face any difficulty so there was no need
to record any objection against this acquisition.
Secondly, after citing the
locational advantages of the land, the
officials overruled objections regarding
the question of earning a livelihood by
saying that the proposal had been approved
both by the screening committee
and by the state after considering all the
aspects. Thirdly, the report dealt with the
point "job for land" simply by saying
that the Land Acquisition Act does not
provide any relief except compensation,
but that the government may take up the
matter with the company particularly for
those farmers who would become landless
and would be devoid of any source
of earning a livelihood. Now, after having
overruled all the objections, the procedure
for land acquisition made headway.

Apart from recording objections within
the legal framework of the Land Acquisition
Act, the farmers of this area also took
recourse to extra-legal means to fight
against the acquisition of their agricultural
land. The information on this part
of the peasant protest has been collected
from interviews of the leaders and participants
of this movement as well as from
press reports and the various written
memoranda submitted by the villagers to
the district and state administration. In
the following section the succession of
the important events of the peasant resistance
has been described.

_Table 5: Profile of Utilisation of Compensation Money by the Land Loser Households Affected by the Acquisition for TML_

+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| Compensation Category in Rupees | Purchase of Agricultural land | Purchase of Shallow Tubewell | House building and/or Repair | Domestic Consumption | Marriage Purpose | Repayment of Loan | Bank Deposit | Business Investment |
+=================================+==============================:+=============================:+=============================:+=====================:+=================:+==================:+=============:+====================:+
| 1,000--10,000                   | 6                             | --                           | 9                            | 31                   | 9                | 2                 | 18           | 6                   |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 10,000--20,000                  | 5                             | 5                            | 5                            | 12                   | 9                | 1                 | 16           | 3                   |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 20,000--30,000                  | --                            | 1                            | 5                            | 5                    | 4                | 2                 | 6            | 1                   |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 30,000--40,000                  | --                            | 1                            | 5                            | 5                    | 5                | 1                 | 6            | 2                   |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 40,000--50,000                  | 1                             | --                           | 1                            | 4                    | 1                | --                | 4            | --                  |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 50,000--60,000                  | --                            | --                           | 1                            | 1                    | 1                | --                | 2            | --                  |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 60,000--70,000                  | 0                             | 0                            | 0                            | 2                    | 1                | 0                 | 1            | --                  |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 70,000--80,000                  | --                            | --                           | --                           | --                   | --               | --                | --           | --                  |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 80,000--90,000                  | 1                             | --                           | --                           | 1                    | 1                | --                | 1            | --                  |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| 90,000--1,00,000                | --                            | --                           | 2                            | 1                    | --               | --                | 4            | 1                   |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
| Total                           | 13                            | 7                            | 28                           | 62                   | 31               | 6                 | 58           | 13                  |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+
|                                 | (9.0)                         | (4.9)                        | (19.4)                       | (43.1)               | (21.5)           | (4.2)             | (40.3)       | (9.0)               |
+---------------------------------+-------------------------------+------------------------------+------------------------------+----------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+---------------------+

The vast rural area which lies between
Medinipur and Kharagpur townships is
dominated by the two left political parties
of the state, namely, CPI and CPI(M),
which are also the major partners of the
LFG. The Congress, which is the opposition
party in the state has some followers
in the area. This party being the major
supporter of economic liberalisation did
not raise any objection when the news of
industrialisation in this area came to be
known. They only raised doubts about
whether the industrialists would at all
choose West Bengal as a suitable site for
industrialisation. In the study area Tata
Metaliks was established on about 200
acres of agricultural land during 1991--92.
Before the establishment of Tata Metaliks
the leaders and cadres of CPI(M) and CPI
organised meetings and continued individual
level campaigns on the "bright
possibility" of getting jobs by the land
losers in the industry. But when the Tata
Metaliks started production, the promise
of providing jobs turned out to be false
and the peasants also experienced the
lengthy as well as tedious process of getting
compensation from the district
administration. All of these caused sufficient
disillusionment among the peasants
who were once hopeful about the positive
effects of the establishment of an industrial
estate in this region.

The decision of the state government
to acquire agricultural land in the same
area for Century Textiles Company was
taken against this background. The pessimism
created among the peasants owing
to the establishment of Tata Metaliks
inspired some of the inhabitants of this
locality to agitate against the acquisition
of land for another pig-iron industry. The
movement gained much popularity under
the leadership of Trilochan Rana (a former
CPI(ML) leader) during 1995--96 who
joined the trade union wing of the Congress
Party and put considerable pressure on
the district administration.

The movement reached its peak in the
latter part of 1995 up to April 1996 during
which time the farmers even went to
the extent of using violence. In the first
week of January 1996 hundreds of farmers
in the Kalaikunda area stormed into
the tent of the engineer who was conducting
soil testing and land survey on behalf
of Century Textiles. A leading national
daily reported on January 10, 1996:

>Land Survey and soil testing work in
Mathurakismat Mouza in the Kalaikunda
gram panchayat area of Kharagpur rural
police station undertaken by Century
Textiles --- a Birla group of Industries --- had
to be abandoned following stiff resistance
from villagers last week ...The farmers
also blocked Sahachak for nine hours
yesterday ... They also lodged a complaint
with the police against the firm (_The
Statesman_, January 10, 1996).

On March 22, 1996, the same national
daily reported a mass deputation by a
group of peasants of the Kharagpur region
before the district administration (_The
Statesman_, March 22, 1996). In this
deputation, the peasants demanded land
for land or a job for the members of the
land-loser families. They also demanded
compensation of Rs 3 lakh per acre of
agricultural land. After this deputation,
about 100 farmers came to the Medinipur
collectorate on April 10, 1996 and submitted
a memorandum to the district magistrate
saying that they would boycott the
ensuing parliamentary election to protest
against the acquisition of fertile agricultural
land for industrial projects. The
farmers stated in their letter that this acquisition
would disturb the local economy
and would destabilise the environmental
balance of the region; this event was also
reported in _The Statesman_ on May 2, 1996.
It is important to note in this connection
that neither the state or district
level Congress leadership, nor any MLA
of this party showed any interest in supporting
this movement of the peasants in
Kharagpur region. The local CPI(M)
leadership and the elected panchayat
members of this area not only remained
silent about this spontaneous movement
of the peasants but they also made every
attempt to smother this agitation by labelling
it as a disturbance created by Congress
to stall the progress of industrialisation
under LFG. Without getting support from
any opposition party and facing stiff resistance
from the ruling left parties and
lacking a coherent organisation, this localised
peasant movement against land
acquisition gradually lost its intensity.

Those who lost land also tried to organise
themselves by refusing to accept compensation
money for a very brief period
under the leadership of a few local leaders
but this effort too did not last long
and the movement finally came to a halt
in the Kalaikunda region.

At the end of this paper an anecdote
from Kantapal village from where the
huge chunk of land acquired for Century
Textiles needs to be narrated. A discussion
between this author and the villagers was
going on about the condition of the small
dykes ('ail' in the local parlance) raised
by the farmers to demarcate the plots of
land possessed by different owners
within the acquired area. Since no cultivation
could be taken up for three successive
seasons in the whole area, which had
turned into a grazing field, the dykes had
started to break. Two consequences of
this situation followed. Firstly, the farmers
who still had land in the vicinity of the
acquired area were facing a lot of difficulties
in protecting their agricultural plots
from the grazing cattle. Earlier there were
other farmers who also shared the responsibility
of driving out the cattle from the
fields during agricultural season. Driving
out the intruding cattle in the paddy fields
had always been a collective affair in
rural areas. After acquisition, the number
of farmers has decreased in this area.
Moreover, cows and buffaloes of the
milkmen of the urban areas of Kharagpur
town have also ventured to exploit this
huge chunk of land.

Secondly, after the breakdown of dykes
the poorer people of the area who used
to collect a good quantity of small fishes
of various types from those agricultural
plots as a common property resource,
were not getting any fish in those plots.
In the discussion three to four persons
including one middle-aged woman and
an old man were present. All of them
were denouncing the government for the
takeover of the fertile agricultural land
for Century Textiles which had not yet
been established. When the question arose
that if people of this area had started to
dislike the ruling party and the government,
then why did they cast their votes
at the panchayat and assembly elections
to the same party every year? The old
man replied: "Look babu, we poor people
always have to ride on some animal almost
blindfolded. After the ride for some time
we start to realise whether it is a tiger or
a bullock. But very often we have to twist
its tail in order to keep it in proper direction"
(translated freely from Bengali). The
present peasant resistance in Nandigram
clearly revealed the power of the peasantry
to twist the tail of their political
masters.

> I am greatly indebted to S A Khan and Alan
Rew for inviting me to present an earlier and
shorter version of this paper in the conference
"Integrating Planning Against Risk" held on
September 17--18, 2005 in Bangkok. I am also
indebted to Michael Cernea for constantly inspiring
me to write this paper. I would like to express
my sincere thanks to the land acquisition officer
and the staff of the land acquisition department
of the Paschim Medinipur district who extended
all kinds of help and cooperation during 1999--2000. I also express my sincere thanks to the
librarian and the staff of the West Bengal assembly
library in Kolkata for their help and cooperation.
Last but not the least, I express my deepest
gratitude to the acquisition affected villagers of
Kharagpur-I block who helped me by providing
all kinds of information when I conducted the
fieldwork during 1995--99. I am grateful to the
anonymous reader of EPW who helped to improve
the first version of the paper.

# References

::: {#refs}

Block Development Office (1997): Final Status
Report of the Below Poverty Line Survey in
Kharagpur I Block, Medinipur District (Unpublished
Report), BDO Office, Kharagpur I,
Medinipur.

\ 

Cernea, M M (1999): 'Why Economic Analysis
Is Essential To Resettlement: A Sociologist's
View' in M Cernea (ed), _The Economics of
Involuntary Resettlement: Questions and
Challenges_, pp 5--49, The World Bank,
Washington DC.

\ 

Guha, A (2004): 'Land Acquisition in a West
Bengal District', _Economic and Political
Weekly_, October 16--22.

\ 

---------. (2006): 'Eviction of _bargadars_ Under State
Patronage in Leftist West Bengal: A Policy
Perspective' in R K Das, A Basu and A (eds),
_Perspectives on Rural Development_, Department
of Anthropology, Vidyasagar University
and Indian Anthropological Society,
Kolkata.

\ 

---------. (2007): _Land, Law and the Left: The Saga of
Disempowerment of the Peasantry in the Era
of Globalisation_, (Forthcoming with Foreword
by Michael Cernea), The Concept Publishing
Company, New Delhi.

\ 

Land Acquisition Department (1992): _Composite
Revised Rate Report for Land Acquisition
Cases of Pig-iron Project,_ P S Kharagpur
(unpublished), Office of the Land Acquisition
Department, Midnapore.

\ 

---------. (1996): _Report on the Hearing of Objections
for Land Acquisition for Century Textiles_
(Unpublished Report), Office of the Land
Acquisition Department, Midnapore.

\ 

Lieten, G K (1996): 'Development, Devolution
and Democracy', Sage, New Delhi.

\ 

_The Statesman_, various issues: 'West Bengal
Assembly Proceedings', Vol 99, 1992.

\ 

West Bengal Industrial Development Corporation
(1999): _Destination West Bengal_, WBIDC,
Calcutta.

:::
