# Efficiency by Consent

It was Frederick W. Taylor\'s purpose to make the laborer worthy of his
hire; to make the hire worthy of the laborer; to make the standard of
living and the conditions of working worthy to be called American. The
American standard of living implies a wage adequate for proper housing
and food and clothing, for proper education and recreation, and for
insurance against those contingencies of sickness, accident,
unemployment, premature death or superannuation, which fall so heavily
upon the working classes. That standard implies hours of labor
sufficiently short to permit those who work to perform also their duties
as citizens and to share in the enjoyment of life. That standard implies
postponement of the working period to an age which enables the child to
develop into a rounded man or woman. That standard implies working
conditions which are not only consistent with the demands of health and
safety, but are also such as may make work for others what it was for
Taylor --- the greatest of life\'s joys.

Taylor recognized that in order to make such a standard of living and of
working attainable, the productivity of man must be greatly increased;
that waste must be eliminated, and particularly the waste of effort
which bears so heavily upon the worker. And yet the man who sought so to
develop industry as to enable labor to reach these higher standards of
working and of living, met, throughout his life, widespread opposition
from those whom he sought particularly to help. Let all who are
undertaking to carry forward his work recognize this hostility as a fact
of fundamental importance, for it presents the main problem which
confronts scientific management.

The causes of this hostility are twofold:

*First*. Only a part of the necessary industrial truths have as yet been
developed.

*Second*. The necessary assent to the application of these truths has
not been obtained.

## LABOR MUST BE CONSERVED AND DEVELOPED

Taylor was a great scientist. He established certain truths, fundamental
in their nature. But he obviously covered only a part of the field of
inquiry. The truths he discovered must be further developed and they
must be supplemented by and adjusted to other truths. The greater
productivity of labor must not only be attainable, but attainable under
conditions consistent with the conservation of health, the enjoyment of
work, and the development of the individual. The facts in this regard
have not been adequately established. In the task of ascertaining
whether proposed conditions of work do conform to these requirements,
the laborer should take part. He is indeed a necessary witness. Likewise
in the task of determining whether in the distribution of the gain in
productivity justice is being done to the worker, the participation of
representatives of labor is indispensable for the inquiry which involves
essentially the exercise of judgment.

Furthermore, those who undertake to apply the truths which Taylor
disclosed must remember that in a democracy it is not sufficient to have
discovered an industrial truth, or even the whole truth. Such truth can
rule only when accompanied by the consent of men.

We who have had occasion to consider the hostility of labor leaders to
the introduction of scientific management, know that the hostility has
in large measure been due to misunderstanding. Much of all the waste
which Taylor undertook to eliminate has no direct relation to the
specific functions of the workingman. It deals with waste in machinery,
in supplies, in planning, in adjustment of production and
distribution --- matters in which changes cannot possibly affect the
workman injuriously. And yet we found in many leaders of labor
undiscriminating opposition to the whole of the so-called _Taylor system_.
But even if we succeed through education in eliminating the general
hostility to the introduction of scientific management in departments of
the business which do not directly affect labor, there will remain a
wide field where the proposed changes do directly affect labor in which
there is determined opposition. This opposition can be overcome only
through securing the affirmative cooperation of the labor organizations.

## LABOR MUST BE CONVINCED THAT INDUSTRIAL TRUTHS ARE HUMAN TRUTHS

In a democratic community men who are to be affected by a proposed
change of conditions should be consulted, and the innovators must carry
the burden of convincing others at each stage in the process of change
that what is being done is right. Labor must have throughout an
opportunity of testing whether that which is being recorded as a truth
is really a truth, and whether it is the whole truth. Labor must not
only be convinced of the industrial truths --- which scientific management
is disclosing --- but must also be convinced that those truths are
consistent with what may be termed human truths. Is the greater
productivity attained clearly consistent with the health of the body,
the mind, and the soul of the worker? Is it consistent with industrial
freedom? Is it consistent with greater joy in work, and generally in
living? These are questions which must be answered in the affirmative,
and to the satisfaction, not of a few merely, but of the majority of
those to be affected.

## LABOR CONSENT AND COOPERATION MUST BE OBTAINED

To do honor to Mr. Taylor and worthily to carry forward his work, those
who are his disciples, and those who may become such, should recognize
that they have in the solution of these questions a call upon them for
patient effort, no less exacting and severe than that to which Taylor
subjected himself when pursuing the law of cutting steel. Every step in
the installation and the working out of scientific management calls for
such cooperation by representatives of labor. The obstacles to securing
it are great. Twenty-five years may be required to remove them fully.
But whatever the time required fully to convince organized labor, it
must be given, if our work is to be well done. The consent and the
cooperation of the worker so represented must be secured. In no other
way can we attain in full measure the increase of productivity upon
which our well-being so largely depends. In no other way can we secure
that joy in work without which increase of productivity will not bring
greater happiness. In no other way can we attain that freedom and
development of the worker without which even his greater happiness would
not promote the general welfare. Let us work unremittingly in the spirit
of Taylor to solve the problem he left unsolved. In the solution of that
problem --- which in a true sense is the labor problem --- the greatest
honor will be done to his memory and the greatest service to mankind.
