# SUCCESSES OF SAVINGS BANK LIFE INSURANCE[^13/1]


[^13/1]: The project of the Massachusetts system was first published in
*Collier\'s Weekly*, September 15, 1906. Its main purpose was to
eliminate or to mitigate so far as possible, the evils incident to the
system of industrial life insurance as then practiced by private
companies. The causes of these evils were investigated; and it was
proposed to remove them by creating a competitive system upon a new
plan.

In 1906 there were outstanding in the United States 17,841,396
industrial life insurance policies, representing \$2,453,603,707 of
insurance. Three companies, the Metropolitan, the Prudential and the
John Hancock, did together 94.3% of this business. The rates and
terms to policy-holders of the three companies did not vary materially
the one from the others.

Throughout the thirty years of American experience in industrial life
insurance prior to September, 1906, there had been substantially no
improvement in the position of the policy-holder. On the contrary, it
had rather worsened. The insured suffered mainly from three evils:

\(a\) The high premium.

\(b\) Over-persuasion leading to taking out of insurance which was bound
soon to lapse.

\(c\) Illiberal and oppressive provisions in the policies.

During these thirty years the cost of insurance to the policy-holder had
gradually increased. In 1887 the rates were on the average nearly 12% higher than the rates prevailing from 1879 to 1887. In 1896 they
were again increased about 8% on the average over the rates
fixed in 1887; and they remained at that level until shortly after
September, 1906. Vice-President Haley Fiske of the Metropolitan,
testifying before the Armstrong Committee in 1905, declared that the
high expense of industrial life insurance was unavoidable.

During these thirty years the lapse rate had not been materially
reduced. Of the policies written in 1903 more than one-third lapsed
within three months and more than one-half within twelve months from the
date of issue.

During these thirty years the policies, instead of becoming more liberal
in their provisions, had been modified from time to time, so that the
chances of the insured receiving benefits from the insurance were small.
For instance: Until shortly after September, 1906, the policies provided
that if death occurred within three months from the date of the policy
nothing would be payable under the contract; if death occurred after
three months and within the first six months, only one-quarter of the
face of the policy would be payable; if death occurred after six months
and before the end of twelve months, one-half the face of the policy
would be payable. These provisions were much less favorable than those
prevailing during the earlier years of industrial life insurance in
America.

Furthermore, in 1906 there was no opportunity of getting extended
insurance or paid-up insurance until after the end of five years after
the date of the policy, and none of getting a cash surrender value at
any time. The policies had no loan value.

The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company had been quite fully
investigated by the Armstrong Committee in 1905. The officials of the
Metropolitan company in testifying before that committee could give no
promise of any improvement in the position of the policy-holder; the
report of the Armstrong Committee contained no recommendations for
remedying the evils disclosed; and the New York remedial legislation of
1906 was so framed as not to apply to industrial insurance.

The discussions incident to the Massachusetts Savings Bank Insurance
plan, beginning in September, 1906, the enactment of the legislation on
June 26, 1907, and the practical introduction of the system in June,
1908, with the actual and potential competition resulting, have wrought
important changes in the rates, methods and practices of the industrial
companies which have mitigated in large measure the flagrant abuses at
which the reform was aimed, namely:

## THE CHANGES WROUGHT

1\. The cost of industrial insurance furnished by the Metropolitan and
other private companies (expressed in the amount purchased by a given
weekly premium) has been repeatedly reduced since September, 1906; so
that to-day it is (on the average) about 20% lower than it was
then.

2\. The methods pursued by the private companies in soliciting
industrial insurance have been improved since September, 1906, so that
the lapse rate is materially reduced. Thus: Taking the three years 1904,
1905 and 1906 the percentage of lapse of outstanding policies to the
number of policies issued during those years was 65. Taking the three
years 1910, 1911 and 1912 the percentage of lapse was only 56. Or,
making the comparison on the basis of the amount of insurance: In the
three years 1904, 1905 and 1906 the amount of insurance lapsed was 68% of the amount written; whereas in the three years 1910, 1911
and 1912 the percentage of lapses was only 58% of the amount
written.

3\. The provisions of the insurance policies issued by the private
companies have been made more just and liberal. For instance, on January
1, 1907, the amount payable in case of death was increased from nothing,
if occurring during the first three months, and one-fourth, if occurring
during the second three months, to one-half the face value of the policy
if death occurred at any time within the first six months. And the
amount payable in case of death during any part of the second six months
was increased from one-half to the full face of the policy. Under the
changes made January 1, 1907, the premiums, which previously had been
payable throughout life, were made to cease at age seventy-five.

4\. Paid-up insurance is now granted by the private companies after
three years, whereas before September, 1906, no paid-up insurance was
granted until after the end of five years from the date of the policy.
It is noteworthy that this change was effected as of January 1, 1907,
although Vice-President Haley Fiske had declared before the Armstrong
Committee in 1905 that \"Any law requiring the issue of paid-up policies
in industrial insurance after three years would be most unjust\" to the
persisting policy-holders.

5\. Since September, 1906, the private companies have provided for cash
surrender values after the end of ten years, although previously no cash
surrender values had been granted.

6\. Since September, 1906, the private companies have made their
policies incontestable one year after date of issue, whereas theretofore
the policies had been incontestable only after two years.

7\. Since September, 1906, extended insurance is said to be granted
after three years from the date of the policy, whereas none had been
granted theretofore.

The improvements made by the private industrial insurance companies as
the result of the Massachusetts plan, have of course been extended to
their entire business throughout the United States. When it is
remembered that the aggregate premium income of the industrial policies
in the United States is now about \$115,000,000 a year, it seems clear
that the industrial policy-holders throughout the country are to-day
buying their insurance for at least \$20,000,000 a year less than they
would have had to pay for the same amount of insurance had the rates
prevailing prior to September, 1906, remained in force.

## MASSACHUSETTS\' GAIN

The weekly premiums collected by the industrial insurance companies from
Massachusetts wage-earners each year exceed \$10,000,000. The saving to
the Massachusetts policy-holders in the private companies which has
resulted from the competition of its State-aided system is nearly
\$2,000,000 a year: while the Commonwealth\'s contribution to the
expenses of the system has averaged less than \$15,000 a year. But
residents of Massachusetts who availed themselves of the opportunity
which savings bank insurance affords, have had these further advantages:

*First*. The gross rates on the monthly premium savings bank policies in
Massachusetts are on the average about 17% less than the now
prevailing rates of the private industrial companies. The Metropolitan
and Prudential companies, however, issue only nonparticipating
policies, whereas the Massachusetts savings bank policies are
participating. The dividends declared on these savings bank policies
have been as follows:

  --- -------------
                                                    *%.*
On policies completing their first anniversary 833
On policies completing their second anniversary 12Â½
On policies completing their third anniversary 14
On policies completing their fourth anniversary 1633
On policies completing their fifth anniversary 20
  --- -------------

Therefore the net cost to the insured, for instance, in the fourth year
is, on the average, about 32% less, and in the fifth year 35% less than the present rates of the private industrial companies.

The policies in one of the private companies, the John Hancock, are
participating, but only after five years from the date of issue.

*Second*. The policies issued by the Massachusetts savings banks are far
more liberal even than those now written by the private industrial
companies. The full face of the policy is payable in case of death at
any time after the issue of the policy. Cash surrender value, paid-up
insurance and extended insurance are granted at any time after six
months from the date of the issue of the policy. The policies have also
a loan value after the end of the first year.

*Third*. A recent investigation of the business of the banks shows that
of the policies issued and having twelve months\' experience, 25.5% of the number of policies and 26.2% of the amount of
insurance are cancelled within a year, whereas in the large industrial
companies over 50% of the policies written are cancelled within
the first year.

Furthermore the so-called cancellations of the savings insurance banks
include all policies surrendered within twelve months, whether by lapse,
by death or by surrender for cash. On the bank policies surrendered
after six months, \$20,336.50 in cash was returned to the policyholders,
and other bank policy-holders also received by way of amounts
applied to purchase paid-up insurance \$3,924.23. This \$24,260.73 would
have been entirely lost to the policy-holders had they been insured in
the industrial companies.

## THE INSURANCE BANKS

On February 28, 1914, the insurance departments of the four savings
banks had outstanding 8413 policies, representing \$3,316,005 insurance
and \$29,482 annuities.

Five years after the Massachusetts system was introduced, the banks held
an accumulated surplus equal to nearly 10% of the aggregate
premium income for the five years, and equal to 14.8% of the
aggregate legal policy reserve.

The aggregate premiums collected during these five years were as
follows:

  --- -------------
Premium income for the first year \$25,377.29
Premium income for the second year 58,890.68
Premium income for the third year 76,348.92
Premium income for the fourth year 102,832.27
Premium income for the fifth year 124,205.08
  --- -------------

## THE EFFECT ON THE BANKS

Four banks have established insurance departments, the third not until
August, 1911, and the fourth on July 5, 1912. Fifteen other savings
banks and four trust companies have become public agencies for these
four banks, and there are also twenty-three other public agencies and
about two hundred private agencies. In two banks, the People\'s Savings
Bank of Brockton and the Whitman Savings Bank, the insurance department
has been conducted for more than five years. The effect has been to
increase markedly the number of their depositors. Massachusetts had, in
1911, 192 savings banks, of which 144 had deposits exceeding
\$1,000,000. Both the People\'s Savings Bank of Brockton and the Whitman
Savings Bank were among the smaller banks of that class. The Whitman
bank is located in a town of 7,639 inhabitants.

The rate of increase of deposits in these two banks, as compared with
the other savings banks in the State, shows the marked effect which the
establishment of an insurance department has in stimulating the business
of the deposit department. Of the 144 Massachusetts savings banks whose
deposits exceeded \$1,000,000, these two banks stood among the first
five in the rate of increase in deposits for the year ending October 31,
1910, over the previous year; the People\'s Savings Bank of Brockton
standing first and the Whitman Savings Bank, fifth. In the year ending
October 31, 1911, these two banks headed this list of Massachusetts
savings banks in the rate of increase; the Whitman Savings Bank standing
first and the People\'s Savings Bank second. That the leading position
taken in these two years by the Brockton and Whitman banks is due to the
insurance department is made more clear by the fact that the other three
banks which stood with them among the first five in the year 1910 lost
their rank as leaders in the year 1911.

The treasurer of the Whitman bank states:

\"I have been unable to find that the Insurance Department has been an
injury to the bank in any particular. On the other hand, this department
has brought the attention of the public to this institution, with the
result that for the past four years our gains have been greater than any
savings bank in any other town in Plymouth County.

\"As savings banks are organized for the purpose of encouraging thrift
and economy, it would seem to me that we have not departed from the
original purpose in establishing a life insurance department, which
bears a close relationship to savings bank business.\"

And the treasurer of the People\'s Savings Bank of Brockton states as
follows:

\"The writer has been of the opinion from the start that it was a good
thing both for the banks and the public, and after observing the
practical working of the plan for a period of a little over three years
I can say that I am more impressed now than at the beginning.

\"Many criticisms were made, as is always the case with anything new,
but none of them were well founded and none of the disastrous results
predicted have materialized.

\"The banks are bigger, better and busier than they were when the
insurance departments were opened, and pages could be written setting
forth the benefits derived by the policy-holders and beneficiaries.

\"Now that there is no longer any doubt of the success of the movement,
the banks and the public are voluntarily interesting themselves in the
plan.

\"The public now come to the bank and apply for insurance and I am sure
this will increase as time goes on and will force all critics back to
the tall timber.\"

The establishment of an insurance department is also serving to develop
the habit of saving in policy-holders. As to this we have striking
evidence in connection with the opening of new deposit accounts at the
times when dividends are declared on the policies, and at the times when
policies are taken out.

## HOW BANK INSURANCE IS DEVELOPED

The business of the savings insurance banks has been developed in large
measure through the educational work conducted by the Massachusetts
Savings Insurance League. This league was organized on November 26,
1906, by public-spirited citizens of Massachusetts to promote the
enactment of the savings bank insurance law. Its work was educational.
It undertook to familiarize the people of Massachusetts with the evils
incident to the then existing system of industrial life insurance, and
to point out the advantages of the Massachusetts plan of savings bank
insurance. After the law was enacted the league exerted itself to secure
the establishment of insurance departments by the People\'s Savings Bank
of Brockton, and by the Whitman Savings Bank, and also the establishment
of agencies. Since that time it has been engaged in active educational
work throughout the Commonwealth. It is largely through the medium of
the League that the advantages of the system have been made known to the
people.

The League has been instrumental in interesting the large number of
manufacturers and others who have established unpaid agencies through
which the insurance is written. Its purpose is to bring to the attention
of the wage-earners of Massachusetts the importance of making wise
provision for the future out of current earnings, either through life
insurance or old-age pensions; to endeavor by way of suggestion to
encourage them to habits of thrift and foresight; and to acquaint them
with the value of savings bank insurance as a means to this end.

## THE COMPANIES\' CONTENTION

Officials of the private industrial insurance companies point to the
relatively small number of policies issued by the Massachusetts
insurance banks as evidence that the system has not succeeded. The
contrary is true. The initiation of the competitive system was so
effective in reforming the most flagrant of the abuses of the industrial
companies, that competition with them is necessarily much more difficult
than it would have been had the old conditions persisted. And the
benefit of these reforms is now enjoyed by nearly every industrial
policyholder in the United States.

It has also been asserted by the Metropolitan Company that while the
great improvements in the position of the industrial policy-holder
followed the initiation of the Massachusetts plan, they were not the
result of the prospective and actual competition of the new system. It
is believed that no basis exists for this contention of the company.
There was no indication of effort or intention on the part of the
industrial insurance companies to improve the situation of the
policy-holder until after the Massachusetts campaign was commenced by
the article in *Collier\'s*. On the contrary, the testimony of the
Metropolitan\'s officials before the Armstrong Committee indicated that
improvement was believed to be impossible. Furthermore the improvement
suddenly made after the discussion incident to the presentation of the
Massachusetts plan, and its potential and actual competition are not the
only evidence that the Massachusetts plan produced the improvements.
More will be found by comparing the changes made by the industrial
insurance companies in the provisions of their policies enumerated
above, with the provisions of the policies issued under the
Massachusetts system. The reforms introduced by the industrial companies
since September, 1906, are clearly due, in the main, to the actual and
potential competition of Savings Bank Insurance.

Boston, MASS., April 1, 1914.

During the ten years which have elapsed since the foregoing article was
prepared, the amount of insurance in force under the Massachusetts
Savings Bank Life Insurance system has increased from \$3,316,005 to
\$31,973,302.

The growth in new business since 1920 has been particularly rapid:

  --- --------------
1920 (year ended October 31) \$2,677,161
1921 (year ended October 31) 1,619,832
1922 (year ended October 31) 3,350,191
1923 (year ended October 31) 5,657,436
1924 (year ended October 31) 6,295,572
Total net increase during five years \$19,600,192
  --- --------------

Four additional savings banks have established insurance departments,
and sixtythree other savings banks and twenty-one trust companies have
established public agencies for the receipt of premiums, besides eleven
such agencies in national banks, Morris Plan Companies, etc., so that
the opportunities offered by the system are made easily available to the
people in all parts of the Commonwealth. The savings insurance banks may
now write policies in \$1000 units, thus making it possible to obtain a
maximum of \$8000 insurance on an individual life. The net cost of the
insurance has steadily grown less, so that today (Nov. 1, 1924) it
appears to be the lowest cost level premium life insurance issued in the
United States.

\"Lapsed\" policies are practically unknown, due largely to the fact
that the policyholder is entitled to a surrender value if his premiums
have been paid for six months. An analysis of the business written
during the three years 1920, 1921, and 1922 shows that only 4.27% of the policies lapsed within six months from date of issue.

Within the past two years the public has manifested a constantly
increasing interest in combining a savings bank account and a life
insurance policy on a so-called ten-year savings-insurance plan, under
which by means of small monthly deposits \$1000 saving is acquired in
ten years, the depositor being insured meanwhile for \$1000.

The insurance premiums received from policyholders since the system was
inaugurated have amounted to \$4,848,865.06. The death claims paid
amount to \$745,559; the dividends to \$1,061,565. The sums returned to
policy-holders in the form of surrender values amount to \$283,245. The
amount held in reserve and surplus for the benefit of policyholders
exceeds three million dollars. Premiums are now being received at the
rate of \$856,524 a year.

The Savings Bank Insurance Law as enacted by the Massachusetts
Legislature in 1907 appears to have been so carefully drafted as to
anticipate with extraordinary foresight the situations to be met as the
institution grew in size. The law has remained unchanged in all
essential particulars.

ALICE H. GRADY,

*Deputy Commissioner for Savings Bank Life Insurance.*

STATE HOUSE, BOSTON, November 1, 1924.
