# TRUSTS AND EFFICIENCY[^14/1]


[^14/1]: Published in *Collier\'s Weekly*, September 14, 1912.

Leaders of the Progressive Party argue that industrial monopolies should
be legalized, lest we lose the efficiency of large-scale production and
distribution. No argument could be more misleading. The issue of
competition versus monopoly presents no such alternative as \"Shall we
have small concerns or large?\" \"Shall we have ill-equipped plants or
well-equipped?\"

In the first place, neither the Sherman law nor any of the proposed
perfecting amendments (La Follette-Lenroot bill or Stanley bill) contain
any prohibition of mere size. Under them a business may grow as large as
it will or can --- without any restriction or without any presumption
arising against it. It is only when a monopoly is attempted, or when a
business, instead of being allowed to grow large, is made large by
combining competing businesses in restraint of trade, that the Sherman
law and the proposed perfecting amendments can have any application. And
even then the Sherman law and the proposed amendments would not
necessarily restrict size. They merely declare that *if there has been
such a combination in restraint of trade* the combiners have the burden
of showing that it was reasonable, or, in other words, consistent with
the public welfare; and that if such a combination controls more than
thirty % of the country\'s business it will, in the absence of
explanation, be deemed unreasonable.

In the second place, it may safely be asserted that in America there is
no line of business in which all or most concerns or plants must be
concentrated in order to attain the size of greatest efficiency. For,
while a business may be too small to be efficient, efficiency does not
grow indefinitely with increasing size. There is in every line of
business a unit of greatest efficiency. What the size of that unit is
cannot be determined in advance by a general rule. It will vary in
different lines of business and with different concerns in the same
line. It will vary with the same concern at different times because of
different conditions. What the most efficient size is can be learned
definitely only by experience. The unit of greatest efficiency is
reached when the disadvantages of size counterbalance the advantages.
The unit of greatest efficiency is exceeded when the disadvantages of
size outweigh the advantages. For a unit of business may be too large to
be efficient as well as too small. And in no American industry is
monopoly an essential condition of the greatest efficiency.

The history of American trusts makes this clear. That history shows:

*First*. No conspicuous American trust owes its existence to the desire
for increased efficiency. \"Expected economies from combination\" figure
largely in promoters\' prospectuses; but they have never been a
compelling motive in the formation of any trust. On the contrary, the
purpose of combining has often been to curb efficiency or even to
preserve inefficiency, thus frustrating the natural law of survival of
the fittest.

*Second*. No conspicuously profitable trust owes its profits largely to
superior efficiency. Some trusts have been very efficient, as have some
independent concerns; but conspicuous profits have been secured mainly
through control of the market --- through the power of monopoly to fix
prices --- through this exercise of the taxing power.

*Third*. No conspicuous trust has been efficient enough to maintain
long, as against the independents, its proportion of the business of the
country without continuing to buy up, from time to time, its successful
competitors.

These three propositions are also true of most of the lesser trusts. If
there is any exception, the explanation will doubtless be found in
extraordinary ability on the part of the managers or unusual trade
conditions.

And this further proposition may be added:

*Fourth*. Most of the trusts which did not secure monopolistic positions
have failed to show marked success or efficiency, as compared with
independent competing concerns.

## THE MOTIVES FOR TRUST BUILDING

The first proposition is strikingly illustrated by the history of the
Steel Trust. The main purpose in forming that trust was to eliminate
from the steel business the most efficient manufacturer the world has
ever known --- Andrew Carnegie. The huge price paid for his company was
merely the bribe required to induce him to refrain from exercising his
extraordinary ability to make steel cheaply. Carnegie could make and
sell steel several dollars a ton cheaper than any other concern. Because
his competitors were unable to rise to his remarkable efficiency, his
business career was killed; and the American people were deprived of his
ability --- his genius --- to produce steel cheaply. As the Stanley
Investigating Committee found, the acquisition of the Carnegie Company
by the promoters of the Steel Trust was \"*not the purchase of a mill,
but the retirement of a man*.\"

That finding is amply sustained by the evidence.

The commissioner of the Steel Plate Association, Mr. Temple, testified:

\"They had to buy the Carnegie Steel Company. Mr. Carnegie, with his
then plant and his organization and his natural resources, was in a
position where he could dominate the entire situation; and had the
United States Steel Corporation not have been formed about the time it
was --- some ten years ago --- the steel business not only of America, but
of the world to-day would be dominated by Andrew Carnegie.\"

George W. Perkins, himself a director of the Steel Trust, through whose
firm (J. P. Morgan & Co.) the bribe to Carnegie was paid, confirms
Temple\'s statement:

\"The situation was very critical. If the Steel Corporation had not been
organized, or something had not been done to correct a very serious
condition at that time, in my judgment by this time Mr. Carnegie would
have personally owned the major part of the steel industry of this
country. . . .\"

And Herbert Knox Smith, Commissioner of Corporations, after elaborate
investigation, declared:

\"The conclusion is inevitable, therefore, that the price paid for the
Carnegie Company was largely determined by fear on the part of the
organizers of the Steel Corporation of the competition of that concern.
Mr. Carnegie\'s name in the steel industry had been long synonymous with
aggressive competition, and there can be little doubt that the huge
price paid for the Carnegie concern was, in considerable measure, for
the specific purpose of eliminating a troublesome competitor, and Mr.
Carnegie in particular. This, it may be noted, was the interpretation
generally placed upon the transaction in trade and financial circles at
the time.\"

The price paid for the Carnegie Company, about April 1, 1901, was
\$492,006,160 in United States Steel Corporation securities --- of the
then market value of \$447,416,640 in cash. The value of the actual
assets of the Carnegie Company on December 31, 1899, as sworn to by
Carnegie, had been only \$75,610,104.06. The total assets of the concern
on March 1, 1900, as shown by the balance sheet, were only
\$101,416,802.43. And Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith, making a very
generous estimate of the net value of the tangible assets of the
Carnegie Company on April 1, 1901, fixes it at only \$197,563,000. The
bribe paid to eliminate Carnegie\'s efficiency was thus at least
\$250,000,000. It was paid, as the Stanley Committee finds, to prevent a
contest \"between fabricators of steel and fabricators of securities;
between makers of billets and of bonds.\" It was paid to save the huge
paper values which George W. Perkins and others had recently created by
combining into eight grossly overcapitalized corporations a large part
of the steel mills of America. No wonder that J. P. Morgan & Co. were
panic-stricken at the rumor that Carnegie was to build a tube mill which
might reduce the cost of making tubes \$10 a ton, when those bankers had
recently combined seventeen tube mills (mostly old) of the aggregate
value of \$19,000,000, had capitalized them at \$80,000,000 and taken
\$20,000,000 of the securities for themselves as promotion fees. The
seven other similar consolidations of steel plants floated about the
same time had an aggregate capitalization of \$437,825,800, of which
\$43,306,811 was taken by the promoters for their fees.

As Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith reported to the President:

\"A steel war might have meant the sudden end of the extraordinary
period of speculative activity and profit. On the other hand, an
averting of this war, and the coalition of the various great
consolidations, if successfully financed, would be a tremendous 'bull'
argument. It would afford its promoters an opportunity for enormous
stock market profits through the sale of securities.\"

So Carnegie was eliminated, and efficiency in steel making was
sacrificed in the interest of Wall Street; the United States Steel
Corporation was formed; and J. P. Morgan & Co. and their associates took
for their services as promoters the additional sum of \$62,500,000 in
cash values.

## THE SOURCES OF MOST PROFITS

The second proposition --- that conspicuous trust profits are due mainly
to monopoly control of the market --- is supported by abundant evidence
equally conclusive.

The Standard Oil Trust stood preeminent as an excessive profit taker.

When Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith made his report to President
Roosevelt in 1907, the trust had for a generation controlled about
eighty-seven % of the oil business of America. It had throughout
that period been managed by men of unusual ability. And yet Commissioner
Smith reports:

\"The conclusion is, therefore, irresistible that the real source of the
Standard\'s power is not superior efficiency, but unfair and
illegitimate practices\ ...

\"Considering all the branches of the oil industry together, the
difference in cost between the Standard and the independent concerns is
not great\ ...

\"It is true, that taken as a whole, the Standard Oil Company is a more
efficient industrial machine than any one of its competitors.
Nevertheless, careful estimates based upon data submitted by a number of
independent concerns as to the cost of pipe-line transportation,
refining, and distributing oil, as compared with the Standard\'s cost
for these operations, indicate that the total difference in efficiency
between the Standard and the independent concerns is not very great\ ...

\"The difference between the operating cost of a number of Standard
refineries and a number of independent refineries was shown to be
substantially nothing. It is possible, however, that some of the larger
Standard refineries are able to reduce their costs a little further and
that there may be some difference in the amount required for profit per
gallon. The Standard may also be able to secure somewhat better yields
from the crude. It is improbable, however, as already stated, that the
superior efficiency of the Standard with respect to both refining costs
and yields would on the average represent a difference of more than
one-fourth of a cent a gallon. The outside figure would be one-half cent
per gallon.

\"It has been shown further that the difference in marketing costs
between Standard and independent concerns in large cities is almost
negligible\ ...

\"As already stated, moreover, the argument, from a comparison between
the costs of the Standard and the costs of the present independent
concerns, does not fully show the fallacy of the Standard\'s claim to
have reduced prices by its superior efficiency. The present independent
concerns are by no means so efficient as those which would have come
into existence in the absence of the restraints imposed by the
monopolistic and unfair methods of the Standard. Had the oil business
continued to develop normally, it is practically certain that there
would have been in the United States to-day a limited number of large
oil concerns, the efficiency of which would be considerably greater than
that of the present independents.\"

Next to the Standard Oil, the Tobacco Trust is, perhaps, the most
prominent of the excessive profit takers. A single one of its many
constituent companies, W. Duke\'s Sons & Co., \"valued in 1885, under
competition, at \$250,000,\" yielded to its owners \"up to 1908, in
securities, dividends, and interest\" \$39,000,000, or 156 times the
value of this particular business in 1885. In 1908 (the latest year
reported on by Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith) the profits of the
Tobacco Trust equalled 39.5% of its total tangible assets. But
there are many different departments of the tobacco business; and the
rate of profit was by no means the same in all in any one year. And in
the same department the profits varied greatly during a series of years.
In 1908, for instance, the profits of the cigar department were only 4% on the value of the tangible assets, while the profits of the
subsidiary smoking tobacco companies were 103.5% of the value of
the tangible assets. What is the explanation of this great variation in
profits? The company was efficiently managed. The same able men
supervised all of the departments. The same huge resources and trade
influence were at the service of each of the departments. Commissioner
Smith\'s elaborate investigation solves the riddle. It brings out
clearly the following features:

\"Very high rates of earnings on the actual investment in most
departments.

\"A marked coincidence of low rates of earnings and a low degree of
control where the latter occurs.

\"A remarkable increase in the rates of earnings as the combination
became more effective in its control.\"

In 1908, when the trust earned only 4% on its cigar business, it
controlled only about one-eighth of the cigar business of the country.
When it earned 103.5% on its smoking tobacco subsidiaries, it
controlled three-quarters of the smoking tobacco business of the
country.

\"The most striking feature of the entire preceding discussion,\" says
Commissioner Smith in concluding, \"is the almost invariable association
of high rates of profit with a high degree of control, or with
monopolistic conditions, and of lower rates of profit with a lesser
degree of control or active competition\ ...

\"The combination\'s ability to establish and maintain prices without
much regard to competition in the principal branches of the business, it
may be repeated, is vividly illustrated by the fact that when the
internal-revenue tax on tobacco was reduced in 1901 and 1902, the
combination maintained its prices at the level which had been
established when the tax was increased some years earlier. As a result
of this policy it appropriated practically the entire reduction in the
tax as additional profit in succeeding years.\"

That is the kind of efficiency in which trusts particularly excel.

As to the Steel Trust\'s extraordinary profits, the Stanley
Investigating Committee finds:

\"The enormous earnings of the Steel Corporation are due not to a degree
of integration or efficiency not possessed by its competitors, but to
the ownership of ore reserves out of all proportion to its output or
requirements, and to the control and operation of common carriers,
divisions of rates, and the liberal allowance obtained from other
concerns through inequitable and inordinate terminal allowances.\"

## BUYING COMPETITORS

The third proposition --- that trusts are not efficient enough to hold
their relative positions in the trade as compared with the independents
without buying up successful competitors --- is also supported by abundant
evidence.

The Steel Trust furnishes a striking example of this. Corporation
Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith, reporting on the operations of the
Steel Trust for the ten years following its formation (1901--10), says:

\"Notwithstanding the great additions made by the corporation to its
properties from earnings, and the acquisition of several important
competing concerns \[including the Tennessee Coal and Iron Company\],
its proportion of the business in nearly every important product, except
pig iron and steel rails, is less than it was in 1901\ ...

\"This table shows that, whereas the Steel Corporation in 1910 had fully
maintained the share of the country\'s total production of pig iron it
held in 1901, its proportion of the production of nearly all steel
products had declined, and in most cases sharply declined. The only
important exception was steel rails. The maintenance of its proportion
here is chiefly due to the erection of a very large rail mill at the new
Gary plant, and to the acquisition of the Tennessee Coal, Iron and
Railroad Company, which had a considerable steel-rail production.

\"Taking the production of steel ingots and castings as a basis, it will
be seen that the Steel Corporation\'s percentage of the total fell from
65.7% in 1901 to 54.3% in 1910. This figure, perhaps, is
the best single criterion by which to judge the change in the
corporation\'s position in the steel industry from a producing
standpoint\ ... It should be noted that the decline in the production
shown by this comparison of 1901 and 1910 percentages was practically
continuous for most products throughout the entire period.\"

That was the condition in 1910. A year later the Steel Trust\'s
proportion of the production of the country had fallen below fifty %.

It may be doubted whether steel rails would have been an \"exception\"
to the steady decline in the Steel Corporation\'s proportion of the
country\'s business had it not been for the steel-rail pool and the
close community of interest between the Steel Corporation and the
railroads. As the Stanley Committee finds:

\"Of the \$18,417,132,238 invested in railways in the United States, the
directors of the Steel Corporation have a voice in the directorates of
or act as executive officers of railroad companies with a total
capitalization and bonded indebtedness of \$10,365,771,833.\"

The Sugar Trust, also, furnishes striking evidence of the inability of
trusts to maintain their position in the trade without buying up
successful competitors. In 1892, after acquiring the Spreckels Company
of the West, the Sugar Trust alone produced ninety % of the sugar
refined in this country. It had vast resources. It had strong political
affiliations. It sought by every means, fair or foul, to maintain its
control. It secured discriminating rates from railroads. It cheated the
Government by false weights and undervaluation. With the bankers\' aid
it crushed competitors through tricky control of credits. But in
1912--- at the end of twenty years of oppression --- its own production of
refined sugar had fallen to forty-two % of the country\'s
production. And, in spite of buying up from time to time stock in
so-called independent cane sugar companies and beet sugar companies, it
controlled in 1912 (according to the statement of President Van Hise in
\"Concentration and Control\") only sixty-two % of this
country\'s production of refined sugar.

The dominating position of the Tobacco Trust was likewise maintained
only through its policy of buying up competitors, as Corporation
Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith so clearly shows:

\"Despite enormous expenditures for advertising and in 'schemes,' and
despite frequent price cutting by means of its so-called 'fighting
brands' and its bogus independent concerns, there has been in several
branches of the industry a constant tendency for competitors to gain
business more rapidly than the combination, and thus to reduce its
proportion of the output. This tendency has been overcome only by
continued buying up of competitive concerns. Many weaker concerns have
been virtually driven out of business or forced to sell out to the
combination, either by reason of the direct competition of the latter,
or as an indirect result of the vigorous competition between the
combination and larger independent concerns. In the case of the larger
and more powerful concerns which it acquired, however, the combination
has usually secured control only by paying a high price. The immense
profits of the combination have enabled it to keep up this policy.

\"This great disparity in size \[between the factories of the
combination and those of the independents\] is not due to lack of
enterprise or capital on the part of the independent concerns, but is
essentially due to the constant transfer of the largest concerns from
the ranks of the independents to those of the combination\ ...

\"The output of individual concerns that remained independent, however,
has increased in most instances. The resultant tendency to increase the
entire independent output was offset by the combination\'s continued
policy of buying up and absorbing the larger and more successful
competitors.\"

Even the Standard Oil Trust, which relied mainly upon its control of the
transportation systems and other methods of unfair competition to crush
competitors, is shown by Commissioner Smith to have been unable to quite
maintain its relative position in the market, despite its continued
buying up of competitors.

## UNSUCCESSFUL TRUSTS

Of the truth of the fourth proposition, stated above --- that most of the
trusts which did not secure monopolistic positions have failed to show
marked success or efficiency as compared with the independent competing
concerns --- every reader familiar with business must be able to supply
evidence. Let him who doubts examine the stock quotations of
long-established industrials and look particularly at the common stock
which ordinarily represents the \"expected economies\" or \"efficiency\"
of combination. Take as examples:

The Upper Leather Trust (American Hide and Leather Company --- a
combination of twenty-one different concerns), with common at 5¼ and
preferred at 26¾.

The Sole Leather Trust (Central Leather Company --- a combination of over
sixty tanneries), with common at 26.

The Paper Trust (International Paper Company --- a combination of
twenty-three news mills), with common at 10.

The Paper Bag Trust (Union Bag and Paper Company --- a combination of
seven different concerns), with common at 6.625.

The Writing Paper Trust (American Writing Paper Company --- a combination
of twenty-eight different concerns), with preferred at 28½ and common
at 3¾ --- almost below the horizon of a quotation.

But perhaps the most conspicuous industrial trust which was not able to
secure control of the market is the International Mercantile Marine.
That company had behind it the ability and resources of J. P. Morgan &
Co., and their great influence with the railroads. It secured a working
agreement with the Hamburg American, the North German Lloyd and other
companies; but it could not secure control of the Atlantic trade, and in
the seven years since its organization has not paid a dividend on its
\$100,000,000 of stock. Its common stands at 5.125, its preferred at 18.875, and they stood little better before the *Titanic* disaster. On the
other hand, the \$120,000,000 stock of the Pullman Company, which has
like influence with the railroads but succeeded in securing a monopoly,
stands at 170¾.

Efficient or inefficient, every company which controls the market is a
\"money-maker.\" No, the issue of \"Competition *versus* Monopoly\"
cannot be distorted into the issue of \"Small Concerns versus Large.\"
The unit in business may, of course, be too small to be efficient, and
the larger unit has been a common incident of monopoly. But a unit too
small for efficiency is by no means a necessary incident of competition.
And a unit *too large* to be efficient is no uncommon incident of
monopoly. Man\'s work often outruns the capacity of the individual man;
and no matter how good the organization, the capacity of an individual
man usually determines the success or failure of a particular
enterprise --- not only financially to the owners but in service to the
community. Organization can do much to make concerns more efficient.
Organization can do much to make larger units possible and profitable.
But the efficacy even of organization has its bounds. There is a point
where the centrifugal force necessarily exceeds the centripetal. And
organization can never supply the combined judgment, initiative,
enterprise and authority which must come from the chief executive
officer. Nature sets a limit to his possible achievement.

As the Germans say: \"Care is taken that the trees do not scrape the
skies.\"
