# TRUSTS AND THE EXPORT TRADE[^15/1]


[^15/1]: Published in *Collier\'s Weekly*, September 21, 1912.

Progressive party advocates of legalizing industrial monopolies urge as
a reason the necessities of the export trade. \"How can we,\" say they,
\"compete with small concerns against England and Germany for the
commerce of the world?\"

The answer is not difficult. There is no such alternative as \"monopoly
or the small concern.\" America has to-day, in all lines of competitive
business, concerns large enough to be the most efficient instruments of
commerce, be it foreign or domestic. With America\'s abundant capital
and the ambition of its citizens, there will be no lack of \"bigness\"
in industry. We need not legalize monopoly in order to equip ourselves
for the foreign trade.

A survey of the relations of our leading trusts to the export trade
should dispel the belief that we are particularly indebted to them
either for the quantity or character of their foreign business.

## STEEL

*First*. Take the exports of steel --- the crude products in which the
Steel Trust deals. George W. Perkins, so prominent as promoter and
director of that corporation, gravely told the Senate Committee: \"We
have been infinitely more successful in expanding our foreign trade than
would have been possible under competitive conditions.\" But the facts
show that the organization of the Steel Trust arrested the development
of the American export trade in steel. Our cost of production rose,
while that of European steel makers remained stationary and they gained
the world\'s growing trade.

The Steel Trust was organized April 1, 1901. During the ten years, 1901
to 1910, our exports of crude steel and iron products increased from
1,154,000 to 1,533,000 tons, or 33%; Great Britain\'s from
3,213,000 to 4,594,000, or 43%; Germany\'s from 838,000 to
4,868,000, or 480%. In other words, America had in 1901, as
compared with England and Germany, nearly 22% of the world\'s
export tonnage. In 1910 America had less than 13%. During these
ten years coincident with the existence of the Steel Trust, America lost
steadily in prestige in the world\'s steel market.

As stated by Mr. T. Good in his able discussion of the subject:

\"From the moment that the Steel Trust got to work the American iron and
steel industry was diverted from natural to unnatural developments.
Costs and prices of raw material were inflated; progress toward economy
was arrested; retrogression set in and America\'s rosy chances of
annexing the world\'s export trade were shattered\ ... It is, indeed, a
demonstrable fact that the trust has done more harm than good from an
American point of view; that it has burdened and handicapped the
American steel trade, and incidentally given Britain, Germany and other
countries better chances in the race. Last year, 1910, the British iron
and steel exports were further in advance of those of America than they
were in 1900, the year before the Steel Trust got down to business;
while German exports, which were about thirty % below those of
the United States in 1900, are now something like three hundred %
above them.\"

And the Steel Trust\'s foreign sales were no more satisfactory in
character than in quantity. Export prices were almost uniformly lower
than domestic prices, and in some instances the advantage given foreign
consumers was surprisingly large, the five-year average being, as the
Stanley Committee shows, for steel rails about \$4 a ton, for structural
shapes over \$5 a ton, and for tin plates over \$14.50 a ton.

Steel Trust officials endeavor to meet this damaging evidence and to
support their assertion that the trust has benefited our export trade by
presenting the following facts: (1) The trust exports more steel than
its constituent companies did before the trust was organized. (2) The
trust\'s percentage of the total crude steel exports of the country, as
compared with the independents, has risen greatly and now amounts to
ninety-five % of the total exports of that character. (3) The
trust\'s exports increased largely in 1911 over 1910.

The facts adduced by the trust\'s officials, rightly interpreted, tend
rather to disprove than to prove their contention. The reason why
America lost its prestige in the world\'s steel trade was the huge
increase in the cost of producing steel in America. That increased cost
was due particularly to the increased cost of producing pig iron. And
for the increased cost of pig iron the organization of the Steel Trust
is in large part responsible. That increase cost drove the independents
out of the foreign market where prices are competitive; and they
necessarily confined themselves to the domestic market where prices were
maintained through Gary dinners. The Steel Trust could still sell
abroad, because its ownership of transportation systems gave them an
unfair advantage over the independents. The trust was perhaps driven to
sell some of its product abroad, because the independents made such
heavy in-roads upon the trust\'s percentage of the domestic
business --- reducing it from over sixty % in 1901 to less than
fifty % in 1911.

The large increase of exports of the trust in 1911 was due, in part, to
the sharp fall in the selling price of steel in the United States during
that year. And the price fell, doubtless, not so much because of
lessened demand as because the Stanley Committee investigation led to
the discontinuance of the Gary dinners.

America may well take pride in her large exports of iron and steel
products. In 1910 they amounted to \$201,271,903; in 1911 to
\$249,656,411. But it is the highly manufactured iron and steel
products, made largely under competitive conditions, like tools and
machinery, to which these large totals are mainly due. The Steel
Trust\'s exports in 1910 amounted (as the Stanley Committee finds) to
only \$41,586,950. Machinery and machines rose from \$50,897,390 in 1902
to \$111,135,833 in 1911. The growth of exports in highly manufactured
iron and steel products is the more remarkable in view of the handicap
to which our manufactures are subjected through the Steel Trust by the
high prices for crude steel products.

Furthermore, the Steel Trust claims to supply ninety-five % of
our crude steel exports. If the formation of trusts advances the export
trade, why have we fallen behind Germany and England in steel exports?
Surely they have no steel trusts comparable with the Steel Corporation
in size or resources.

Progressive Party advocates of monopoly have the habit of attributing
the commercial development of Germany largely to the size of their
industrial units and to the legalization of monopolies; but they misread
the facts.

One of the largest and most successful of the German cartels is that of
the steel producers, controlling ninety-five % of the country\'s
production --- as our Steel Trust controls ninety-five % of this
country\'s crude steel exports. The German Trust consists of thirty-six
separate concerns. Their aggregate capital is a little over
1,250,000,000 marks, or \$312,000,000--- much less than one-fourth of the
capitalization of the United States Steel Corporation, which, including
underlying bonds and outstanding securities of subsidiary companies, is
found by the Stanley Committee to be \$1,465,555,819. The average
capital of each of those thirty-six German concerns is less than
\$10,000,000; and probably not one of them has a capital as large as
some of our so-called independents; for the Lackawanna Steel Company has
a capitalization in bonds and stocks of \$145,412,000; the Republic Iron
& Steel Co., \$70,630,000; the Cambria Steel Company, \$59,468,000; the
Jones & Laughlin Steel Company, \$54,487,000; and the Bethlehem Steel
Company, \$66,336,000.

Furthermore, each one of those thirty-six German concerns, which are
federated for certain purposes, are free and independent in other
respects. They are restricted as to selling price and quantity of
production (these being fixed by the syndicate), but they are absolutely
independent as to internal management. The syndicate exercises no
control whatever as to methods and processes of manufacture, or over the
method of securing raw material by the individual members, or with their
labor policy. Furthermore, the limited quota assigned to each member
relates exclusively to products made for sale. Any member may use as
much steel and iron as he pleases in his own factories; that is, may
work up into more highly manufactured goods the crude steel products to
which alone the cartel restrictions apply. The German Steel Trust
preserved competition in large part among its constituent concerns. The
United States Steel Trust destroyed competition among its constituent
concerns. This greater freedom for individual action, coupled with the
fact that the thirty-six concerns are separately owned, and that the
combination agreement is for a limited term only, may account, in large
part, for the fact that, in Germany, the cost of producing iron and
steel is no higher than it was ten or twelve years ago, while the
American cost of production has risen greatly.

How groundless, in the light of these facts, is the contention made by
Mr. George W. Perkins, before the Senate Committee on Interstate
Commerce, that the Steel Trust must be preserved to put us on a par with
Germany:

\"Suppose,\" asked Senator Newlands, \"the steel company were divided
to-day into ten corporations of \$150,000,000 each, instead of being
organized into one corporation having nearly a billion and a half of
capital. Do you not think that each one of those units could be as
efficient in business and in all the economies as the total aggregation
in one corporation?\"

\"Not as efficient,\" answered Mr. Perkins. \"If I were asked to put my
finger on one disadvantage greater than the other, it would be its
effect on the foreign trade. You take ten such companies and go out and
compete with Germany. It is self-evident that we could not begin to do
it as effectively as with one large company.\"

But the ultimate success even of the German competitive system of
combinations is by no means assured. Although a very wide field of
competitive endeavor is left open and the incentive of separate
ownership is preserved, the evils of combination appear not to have been
entirely avoided. The steel and iron cartel was not formed until 1904;
but already (as the statement quoted by President Van Hise in his
\"Concentration and Control\" shows) grave difficulties are manifesting
themselves:

\"It is feared that the organization of the steel industry in the form
of the steel combine will result in a gradual deterioration in the
quality of steel products and that the chief object of the combine will
become quantity rather than quality.

\"It is maintained that the wishes of customers are not given due
consideration; that they are compelled to take the quality of steel
which the combine sees fit to give them, regardless of the special needs
of their business;\ ... that it is difficult for the manufacturer to
secure as uniform a grade of goods as he had been able to obtain when he
bought all his steel from the same firm\ ...

\"The combine has\ ... secured gradually increasing prices\ ...

\"It is also asserted that ... it has been possible for the cartel to
shift the burden more and more upon the less organized manufacturers who
use steel products as raw materials. Consequently the last and
unorganized stages of steel products manufacture --- _e.g._, machine-making,
etc.--- have been forced to bear the greater proportion of the burden
caused by a gradual increase in prices. These manufacturers will
undoubtedly be able to shift a part of the burden upon the final
consumer ... \"

It is notable that the combination sells steel abroad lower than at
home; in some cases as much as twenty % cheaper, following the
same policy as the United States Steel Corporation.

\"The manufacturing interests claim, and apparently with good grounds,
that the export policy of the steel combine will in the long run prove
disastrous to the exports of the German machine industries. Whenever the
home market is unable to absorb the amount of steel that the producers
place at the syndicate\'s disposal, it is generally forced to reduce its
price to foreign buyers in order to get rid of the out-put. In this way
the foreign manufacturer of machines, by obtaining his raw material from
the German combine, is placed in an unduly advantageous position in
competing with the German producer. In 1904, for example, pig iron was
sold abroad at from 69 to 70 marks, whereas the domestic buyer was
forced to pay from 82 ½ to 92 ½\ ...

\"Generally the larger and more powerful members have benefited more
than the weaker ones, through its activity; and in some cases the
condition of the weaker members has deteriorated rather than improved.
While some companies have undoubtedly been able to remain in existence
as a result of the syndicate\'s activity that would under the
competitive system have been forced to the wall, others that might have
developed under the competitive system have been held back by the
cartel\'s policy of combination.\"

Hasn\'t all that a very familiar sound? \"Gradually increasing prices\";
\"shifting the burden upon the ultimate consumer\"; \"selling cheaper
abroad than at home.\" Verily, if the tariff is not the \"Mother of the
Trusts,\" the attendant abuses are at least akin.

## OIL

*Second*. Take next the export of mineral oil and oil products --- a very
important item in our exports. In 1911 it amounted in value to
\$105,922,848, or about one-twentieth of our total exports. The exports
are, also, a very important part of America\'s oil trade, as we have
customarily exported more than one-half of all the illuminating oil
produced in the country. For more than a generation the Standard Oil
Company dominated the American oil trade, having in recent years about
eighty-six % of the business of the country. That company stood
preeminent among American trusts in age, in power, in resources, in
perfection of organization, and in ability of management. Through the
unfair use of that power, ability and organization it prevented the rise
of any large American competitor. If great size and monopoly powers gave
peculiar advantages to Americans for developing export trade, surely the
Standard should have conquered for us the oil trade of the world; but
Corporation Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith showed that, though our oil
exports grew largely, we lost during the reign of the Standard Oil our
relative position in the world\'s market, adding:

\"More than half the illuminating oil produced in this country is
exported. The exportation of naphtha, lubricating oils, paraffin, wax
and candles made from wax is also considerable. This country is,
however, to-day a comparatively less important factor in the petroleum
markets of the world than it was twenty or thirty years ago.\"

And Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith also shows that the Standard Oil
Company did not succeed in acquiring any larger part of the foreign
trade than it did of the domestic, the percentage in each being about
eighty-seven % of the whole, saying:

\"The percentage of export trade in illuminating oil handled or
controlled by the Standard Oil Company, therefore, is substantially the
same as the proportion of its production.\"

And, like the Steel Trust, the Standard Oil was persistently selling its
product much cheaper abroad than in America, imposing extra burdens upon
the American consumer to compensate for any possible losses in the
foreign trade, as Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith so clearly shows:

\"The preceding analysis of the price policy of the Standard Oil Company
in the export trade during recent years, as compared with its price
policy in the domestic trade, shows two conspicuous facts. In the first
place, while the prices of illuminating oil in the principal foreign
markets have for years been relatively lower than the prices in the
United States, this disparity became especially conspicuous during the
years 1903, 1904 and 1905. During those years the domestic prices stood
at a much higher level than for many years before, while prices in the
principal foreign markets, like the United Kingdom, Germany and the
Orient, stood at times from two to three cents below the average price
in the United States, transportation costs, difference in quality of
oil, etc., being taken into account.

\"In the second place, the investigation shows that the decrease in
prices in the foreign trade, during the years 1903--1905, was not due to
an oversupply of American oil or the oil from all sources combined, but
was due particularly to an attack by the Standard Oil Company upon
certain new and threatening competitors. Aside from other proofs,
conclusive evidence that there was no oversupply of American oil, as
well as evidence that the Standard\'s policy has been to promote its own
interests rather than those of the United States, is found in the
Standard\'s extensive purchases of Russian oil during these years and
its acquisition of crude-oil land and refineries in foreign countries.\"

President Van Hise, in his \"Concentration and Control,\" mentions that
in 1905 the United States was taken into the International Steel Rail
Syndicate, and also says:

\"Oil is one of the businesses in which the international combination
and co-operation have gone far, in some cases there being union, in
others division, of territory.\"

Possibly these facts may furnish a partial explanation of America\'s
falling prestige in the foreign steel and oil trades. Was the foreign
market sacrificed to avoid competition by the foreigners in the domestic
market?

## TOBACCO

*Third*. Tobacco presents a field where an important foreign market was
deliberately sacrificed by the dominating trust in order to protect
itself from foreign competition in the home market. Tobacco products are
among our leading manufactures, but our exports of manufactured tobacco
products are, as Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith reports,
\"comparatively insignificant.\"

\"The exports in 1908 amounted to \$5,550,695, or less than two %
of the value of our manufactures of tobacco\ ... \[In 1911 they amounted
to only \$4,677,859.\]

\"The existence of governmental monopolies of tobacco manufactures in a
number of leading countries and of prohibitive tariffs on the
importation of manufactured tobacco in other countries prevents any
considerable development in international trade in such products.\"

The Tobacco Trust, which acquired control of the greater part of what
little of the export trade America had, deliberately closed the door to
any exports by it to Great Britain or Ireland. In consideration of the
powerful British trust (the Imperial) agreeing not to carry on business
in manufactured tobaccos in the United States, the Tobacco Trust, and
its active directors individually, agreed that they would not
thereafter, directly or indirectly, carry on business in Great Britain
or Ireland.

## WHY EXPORTS GROW

Trusts have, of course, contributed to our export trade, as have many
independent manufacturers. Some of these trust contributions have been
large; but the great increase in our exports of manufactures is not due
to the existence of trusts. Increased exports have been quite as marked
in other lines as in trust-made goods. We hear particularly of the
Harvester Trust\'s export business; and it is true that this country\'s
exports in agricultural implements doubled in ten years --- 1902 to 1911.
But in many long-established and highly competitive lines of
manufacture, like special lines of machinery and of tools, the 1911
exports were not only double but threefold those of 1902; and in other
new and highly competitive businesses the increases were much greater.
For instance, the 1911 exports of automobiles were twenty times as large
as those of 1902; the 1912 exports nearly thirty times as large. The
fact is we have become a great manufacturing people. In the year ending
June 30, 1912, our exports of manufactured products exceeded
\$1,000,000,000. American manufactures have been developed through
initiative, enterprise, energy and ambition --- all common characteristics
of competitive business. The trusts had, of course, a part in securing
these foreign markets; and have enjoyed, perhaps, a still larger share
of their fruits by exploiting foreign markets in which independent
manufacturers had been the pioneers.

But the trusts have not been the cause of our heavy export business; nor
are they essential to its continuance or future development. And it
should be borne in mind that the great trusts carry, in their huge
resources and the volume of their business, also an element of danger to
our export trade. Many of them have already established factories in
foreign countries from which they supply a part, at least, of their
foreign trade. This is true of the Standard Oil Company, of the
Harvester Company, of the Shoe Machinery Company and of many others. The
establishment of these foreign factories has been due, in large measure,
to the existence of foreign tariffs or to the requirements of foreign
patent laws. But it has been due, in part, also to a lower cost of
production abroad, resulting from the lower wages paid there. We have
been able, in many lines, to produce goods at lower cost in America than
foreigners do abroad, in spite of paying higher wages; because of
greater superiority in management or the introduction of advanced
machinery and labor-saving devices. But is it not possible that our able
business managers, transferring to foreign countries American business
organization, machinery and methods, may be able to produce with
low-priced foreign labor goods for the foreign trade more cheaply abroad
than at home? And, in such event, would they not be led to develop their
foreign factories instead of those at home, and the export trade suffer
accordingly? Such a course might bring great gains to the American
capitalists, who are the stockholders of the trusts; but the American
workingmen would lose.

Has not our export trade more to lose than to gain through the
legalization of monopolies?
