# COMPETITION THAT KILLS[^16/1]

[^16/1]: Published in *Harper\'s Weekly*, November 15, 1913.

\"I cannot believe,\" said Mr. Justice Holmes, \"that in the long run
the public will profit by this course, permitting knaves to cut
reasonable prices for mere ulterior purposes of their own, and thus to
impair, if not destroy, the production and the sale of articles which it
is assumed to be desirable the people should be able to get.\"

Such was the dissent registered by this forward-looking judge when, two
years ago, the Supreme Court of the United States declared invalid
contracts by which a manufacturer of trade-marked goods sought to
prevent retailers from cutting the price he had established. \[(Dr. Miles
Medical Co. vs. Park & Sons Co., 220 U. S.
409\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=220&page=409){.external-link}.
) Shortly before, the court had held that mere possession of a copyright
did not give the maker of an article power to fix by notice the price at
which it should be sold to the consumer. (\[Bobbs-Merrill Co. vs. Straus,
210 U. S.
339\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=210&page=339){.external-link}.)
And now the court, by a five-to-four decision, has applied the same rule
to patented articles, thus dealing a third blow at the practice of
retailing nationally advertised goods at a uniform price throughout the
country. (\[Bauer vs. O\'Donnell, 229 U.S.
1\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=229&page=1){.external-link}.)

Primitive barter was a contest of wits instead of an exchange of
ascertained values. It was, indeed, an equation of two unknown
quantities. Trading took its first great advance when money was adopted
as the medium of exchange. That removed one-half of the uncertainty
incident to a trade; but only one-half. The transaction of buying and
selling remained still a contest of wits. The seller still gave as
little in value and got as much in money as he could. And the law looked
on at the contest, declaring solemnly and ominously: \"Let the buyer
beware.\" Within ample limits the seller might legally lie with
impunity; and, almost without limits, he might legally deceive by
silence. The law gave no redress because it deemed reliance upon
sellers\' talk unreasonable; and not to discover for one\'s self the
defects in an article purchased was ordinarily proof of negligence. A
good bargain meant a transaction in which one person got the better of
another. Trading in the \"good old days\" imposed upon the seller no
obligation either to tell the truth, or to give value or to treat all
customers alike. But in the last generation trade morals have made great
strides. New methods essential to doing business on a large scale were
introduced. They are time-saving and labor-saving; and have proved also
conscience-saving devices.

The greatest progress in this respect has been made in the retail trade;
and the first important step was the introduction of the one-price
store. That eliminated the constant haggling about prices, and the
unjust discrimination among customers. But it did far more. It tended to
secure fair prices; for it compelled the dealer to make, deliberately,
prices by which he was prepared to stand or fall. It involved a
publicity of prices which invited a comparison in detail with those of
competitors; and it subjected all his prices to the criticism of all his
customers. But while the one-price store marked a great advance, it did
not bring the full assurance that the seller was giving value. The
day\'s price of the article offered was fixed and every customer was
treated alike; but there was still no adequate guarantee of value, both
because there was ordinarily no recognized standard of quality for the
particular article, and because there was no standard price even for the
article of standard quality.

Under such conditions the purchaser had still to rely for protection on
his own acumen, or on the character and judgment of the retailer; and
the individual producer had little encouragement to establish or to
maintain a reputation. The unscrupulous or unskilful dealer might be led
to abandon his goods for cheaper and inferior substitutes. This
ever-present danger led to an ever-widening use of trade-marks. Thereby
the producer secured the reward for well-doing and the consumer the
desired guarantee of quality. Later the sale of trade-marked goods at
retail in original packages supplied a further assurance of quality, and
also the assurance that the proper quantity was delivered. The enactment
of the Federal Pure Food law and similar State legislation strengthened
these guarantees.

But the standard of value in retail trade was not fully secured until a
method was devised by which a uniform retail selling price was
established for trade-marked articles sold in the original package. In
that way, widely extended use of a trade-marked article fostered by
national advertising could create both a reputation for the article and
a common knowledge of its established selling price or value. With the
introduction of that device the evolution of the modern purchase became
complete. The ordinary retail sale --- the transaction which had once been
an equation of two unknown quantities --- became an equation of two known
quantities. Uncertainty in trade is eliminated by \"A Dollar and the
Ingersoll Watch,\" or \"Five cents and the Uneeda Biscuits.\"

## THE COURT\'S PROHIBITION

Such is the one-price system to which the United States Supreme Court
denied its sanction. The courts of Great Britain had recognized this
method of marketing goods as legal. The Supreme Court of Massachusetts
and that of California had approved it. The system was introduced into
America many years ago, and has become widely extended. To abandon it
now would disturb many lines of business and seriously impair the
prosperity of many concerns.

When the United States Supreme Court denied to makers of copyrighted or
patented goods the power to fix by notice the prices at which the goods
should be retailed, the court merely interpreted the patent and
copyright acts and declared that they do not confer any such special
privilege. But when the court denied the validity of contracts for
price-maintenance of trade-marked goods, it decided a very different
matter. It did not rest its decision mainly upon the interpretation of a
statute; for there is no statute which in terms prohibits
price-maintenance, or, indeed, deals directly with the subject. It did
not refuse to grant a special privilege to certain manufacturers; it
denied a common right to all producers. Nor does the decision of the
court proceed upon any fundamental or technical rule of law. The
decision rests mainly upon general reasoning as to public policy; and
that reasoning is largely from analogy.

## THE DEMANDS OF PUBLIC POLICY

When a court decides a case upon grounds of public policy, the judges
become, in effect, legislators. The question then involved is no longer
one for lawyers only. It seems fitting, therefore, to inquire whether
this judicial legislation is sound --- whether the common trade practice
of maintaining the price of trade-marked articles has been justly
condemned. And when making that inquiry we may well bear in mind this
admonition of Sir George Jessel, a very wise English judge:

\"If there is one thing which more than any other public policy
requires, it is that men of full age and competent understanding shall
have the utmost liberty of contracting, and that their contracts, when
entered into freely and voluntarily, shall be held sacred, and shall be
enforced by courts of justice. Therefore, you have this paramount public
policy to consider, that you are not lightly to interfere with this
freedom of contract.\"

## THE COURT'S OBJECTION

The Supreme Court says that a contract by which a producer binds a
retailer to maintain the established selling price of his trade-marked
product is void; because it prevents competition between retailers of
the article and restrains trade.

Such a contract does, in a way, limit competition; but no man is bound
to compete with himself. And when the same trade-marked article is sold
in the same market by one dealer at a less price than by another, the
producer, in effect, competes with himself. To avoid such competition,
the producer of a trade-marked article often sells it to but a single
dealer in a city or town; or he establishes an exclusive sales agency.
No one has questioned the legal right of an independent producer to
create such exclusive outlets for his product. But if exclusive selling
agencies are legal, why should the individual manufacturer of a
trade-marked article be prevented from establishing a marketing system
under which his several agencies for distribution will sell at the same
price? There is no difference, in substance, between an agent who
retails the article and a dealer who retails it.

For many business concerns the policy of maintaining a standard price
for a standard article is simple. The village baker readily maintained
the quality and price of his product, by sale and delivery over his own
counter. The great Standard Oil monopoly maintains quality and price
(when it desires so to do) by selling throughout the world to the
retailer or the consumer from its own tank-wagons. But for most
producers the jobber and the retailer are the necessary means of
distribution --- as necessary as the railroad, the express or the parcel
post. The Standard Oil Company can, without entering into contracts with
dealers, maintain the price through its dominant power. Shall the law
discriminate against the lesser concerns which have not that power, and
deny them the legal right to contract with dealers to accomplish a like
result? For in order to insure to the small producer the ability to
maintain the price of his product, the law must afford him contract
protection, when he deals through the middleman.

But the Supreme Court says that a contract which prevents a dealer of
trade-marked articles from cutting the established selling price,
restrains trade. In a sense every contract restrains trade; for after
one has entered into a contract, he is not as free in trading as he was
before he bound himself. But the right to bind one\'s self is essential
to trade development. And it is not every contract in restraint of
trade, but only contracts *unreasonably* in restraint of trade, which
are invalid. Whether a contract does unreasonably restrain trade is not
to be determined by abstract reasoning. Facts only can be safely relied
upon to teach us whether a trade practice is consistent with the general
welfare. And abundant experience establishes that the one-price system,
which marks so important an advance in the ethics of trade, has also
greatly increased the efficiency of merchandising, not only for the
producer, but for the dealer and the consumer as well.

## THE PRODUCER\'S PLEA

If a dealer is selling unknown goods or goods under his own name, he
alone should set the price; but when a dealer has to use somebody
else\'s name or brand in order to sell goods, then the owner of that
name or brand has an interest which should be respected. The transaction
is essentially one between the two principals --- the maker and the user.
All others are middle-men or agents; for the product is not really sold
until it has been bought by the consumer. Why should one middleman have
the power to depreciate in the public mind the value of the maker\'s
brand and render it unprofitable not only for the maker but for other
middlemen? Why should one middleman be allowed to indulge in a practice
of price-cutting, which tends to drive the maker\'s goods out of the
market and in the end interferes with people getting the goods at all?

## CUT PRICES A MISLEADER

When a trade-marked article is advertised to be sold at less than the
standard price, it is generally done to attract persons to the
particular store by the offer of an obviously extraordinary bargain. It
is a bait --- called by the dealers a \"leader.\" But the cut-price
article would more appropriately be termed a \"mis-leader\"; because
ordinarily the very purpose of the cut-price is to create a false
impression.

The dealer who sells the Dollar Ingersoll watch for sixty-seven cents
necessarily loses money in that particular transaction. He has no desire
to sell any article on which he must lose money. He advertises the sale
partly to attract customers to his store; but mainly to create in the
minds of those customers the false impression that other articles in
which he deals and which are not of a standard or known value will be
sold upon like favorable terms. The customer is expected to believe that
if an Ingersoll watch is sold at thirty-three and one-third %
less than others charge for it, a ready-to-wear suit or a gold ring will
be sold as cheap. The more successful the individual producer of a
trade-marked article has been in creating for it a recognized value as
well as a wide sale, the greater is the temptation to the unscrupulous
to cut the price. Indeed a cut-price article can ordinarily be effective
as a \"mis-leader\" only when both the merits and the established
selling price are widely known.

## HOW CUT PRICES HURT

The evil results of price-cutting are far-reaching. It is sometimes
urged that price-cutting of a trade-marked article injures no one; that
the producer is not injured, since he received his full price in the
original sale to jobber or retailer; and indeed may be benefited by
increased sales, since lower prices ordinarily stimulate trade; that the
retailer cannot be harmed, since he has cut the price voluntarily to
advance his own interests; that the consumer is surely benefited because
he gets the article cheaper. But this reasoning is most superficial and
misleading.

To sell a Dollar Ingersoll watch for sixty-seven cents injures both the
manufacturer and the regular dealer; because it tends to make the public
believe that either the manufacturer\'s or the dealer\'s profits are
ordinarily exorbitant; or, in other words, that the watch is not worth a
dollar. Such a cut necessarily impairs the reputation of the article,
and, by impairing reputation, lessens the demand. It may even destroy
the manufacturer\'s market. A few conspicuous \"cut-price sales\" in any
market will demoralize the trade of the regular dealers in that article.
They cannot sell it at cut prices without losing money. They might be
able to sell a few of the articles at the established price; but they
would do so at the risk to their own reputations. The cut by others, if
known, would create the impression on their own customers of having been
overcharged. It is better policy for the regular dealer to drop the line
altogether. On the other hand, the demand for the article from the
irregular dealer who cuts the price is short-lived. The cut-price
article cannot long remain his \"leader.\" His use for it is sporadic
and temporary. One \"leader\" is soon discarded for another. Then the
cut-price outlet is closed to the producer; and, meanwhile, the regular
trade has been lost. Thus a single prominent price-cutter can ruin a
market for both the producer and the regular retailer. And the loss to
the retailer is serious.

On the other hand, the consumer\'s gain from price-cutting is only
sporadic and temporary. The few who buy a standard article for less than
its value do benefit --- unless they have, at the same time, been misled
into buying some other article at more than its value. But the public
generally is the loser; and the losses are often permanent. If the
price-cutting is not stayed, and the manufacturer reduces the price to
his regular customers in order to enable them to retain their market, he
is tempted to deteriorate the article in order to preserve his own
profits. If the manufacturer cannot or will not reduce his price to the
dealer, and the regular retailers abandon the line, the consumer suffers
at least the inconvenience of not being able to buy the article.

## PRICE MAINTENANCE --- NOT PRICE FIXING

The independent producer of an article which bears his name or
trade-mark --- be he manufacturer or grower --- seeks no special privilege
when he makes contracts to prevent retailers from cutting his
established selling price. The producer says in effect: \"That which I
create, in which I embody my experience, to which I give my reputation,
is my property. By my own effort I have created a product valuable not
only to myself, but to the consumer; for I have endowed this specific
article with qualities which the consumer desires, and which the
consumer should be able to rely confidently upon receiving when he
purchases my article in the original package. To be able to buy my
article with the assurance that it possesses the desired qualities is
quite as much of value to the consumer who purchases it as it is of
value to the maker who is seeking to find customers for it. It is
essential that the consumer should have confidence, not only in the
quality of my product, but in the fairness of the price he pays. And to
accomplish a proper and adequate distribution of product, guaranteed
both as to quality and price, I must provide by contract against the
retail price being cut.\"

The position of the independent producer who establishes the price at
which his own trade-marked article shall be sold to the consumer must
not be confused with that of a combination or trust which, controlling
the market, fixes the price of a staple article. The independent
producer is engaged in a business open to competition. He establishes
his price at his peril --- the peril that, if he sets it too high, either
the consumer will not buy, or, if the article is nevertheless popular,
the high profits will invite even more competition. The consumer who
pays the price established by an independent producer in a competitive
line of business does so voluntarily; he pays the price asked, because
he deems the article worth that price as compared with the cost of other
competing articles. But when a trust fixes, through its monopoly power,
the price of a staple article in common use, the consumer does not pay
the price voluntarily. He pays under compulsion. There being no
competitor he must pay the price fixed by the trust, or be deprived of
the use of the article.

## PRICE-CUTTING THE ROAD TO MONOPOLY

Price-cutting has, naturally, played a prominent part in the history of
nearly every American industrial monopoly.

Commissioner Herbert Knox Smith found, after the elaborate investigation
undertaken by the Federal Bureau of Corporations, that:

\"One of the most effective means employed by the Standard Oil Company
to secure and maintain the large degree of monopoly which it possesses,
is the cut in prices to the particular customers, or in the particular
markets of its competitors, while maintaining them at a higher level
elsewhere.\"

And Chief Justice White, in delivering the opinion of the United States
Supreme Court in the Tobacco Trust case, said:

\"... the intention existed to use the power of the combination as a
vantage ground to further monopolize the trade in tobacco by means of
trade conflicts designed to injure others, either by driving competitors
out of the business or compelling them to become parties to a
combination --- a purpose whose execution was illustrated by the plug war
which ensued and its results, by the snuff war which followed and its
results, and by the conflict which immediately followed the entry of the
combination in England and the division of the world\'s business by the
two foreign contracts which ensued.\"

Therefore recent legislative attempts to stay monopoly commonly include
in some form prohibition against the making of cut-throat prices, with a
view to suppressing competition. Such provisions will be found in the
bills proposed by Senator La Follette, Congressman Stanley and Senator
Cummins to supplement the Sherman Anti-Trust Act; and statutes dealing
with the subject have been enacted in several States.

President Wilson urged most wisely that, instead of sanctioning and
regulating private monopoly, we should regulate competition. Undoubtedly
statutes must be enacted to secure adequate and effective regulation;
but shall our courts prohibit voluntary regulation of competition by
those engaged in business? And is not the one-price system for
trade-marked articles a most desirable form of regulation?

## MONOPOLY\'S EASIEST WAY

The competition attained by prohibiting the producer of a trade-marked
article from maintaining his established price offers nothing
substantial. Such competition is superficial merely. It is sporadic,
temporary, delusive. It fails to protect the public where protection is
needed. It is powerless to prevent the trust from fixing extortionate
prices for its product. The great corporation with ample capital, a
perfected organization and a large volume of business can establish its
own agencies or sell direct to the consumer, and is in no danger of
having its business destroyed by price-cutting among retailers. But the
prohibition of price-maintenance imposes upon the small and independent
producers a serious handicap. Some avenue of escape must be sought by
them; and it may be found in combination. Independent manufacturers
without the capital or the volume of business requisite for engaging
alone in the retail trade will be apt to combine with existing chains of
stores, or to join with other manufacturers similarly situated in
establishing new chains of retail stores through which to market their
products direct to the consumer. The process of exterminating the small
independent retailer already hard pressed by capitalistic
combinations --- the mail-order houses, existing chains of stores and the
large department stores --- would be greatly accelerated by such a
movement. Already the displacement of the small independent business man
by the huge corporation with its myriad of employees, its absentee
ownership and its financier control presents a grave danger to our
democracy. The social loss is great; and there is no economic gain. But
the process of capitalizing free Americans is not an inevitable one. It
is not even in accord with the natural law of business. It is largely
the result of unwise, man-made, privilege-creating law, which has
stimulated existing tendencies to inequality instead of discouraging
them. Shall we, under the guise of protecting competition, further
foster monopoly by creating immunity for the price-cutters?

Americans should be under no illusions as to the value or effect of
price-cutting. It has been the most potent weapon of monopoly --- a means
of killing the small rival to which the great trusts have resorted most
frequently. It is so simple, so effective. Far-seeing organized capital
secures by this means the co-operation of the short-sighted unorganized
consumer to his own undoing. Thoughtless or weak, he yields to the
temptation of trifling immediate gain, and, selling his birthright for a
mess of pottage, becomes himself an instrument of monopoly.
