# THE NEW HAVEN --- AN UNREGULATED MONOPOLY[^18/1]


[^18/1]: Published in the \"Boston Journal,\" December 13, 1912.

The breakdown of transportation in New England under the New Haven
monopoly has become obvious. Demoralized and curtailed freight service,
antiquated equipment, frequent wrecks, discontented employees, heavy
depreciation in the market value of securities, and huge borrowing on
shorttime notes at high interest are the accumulated evidences of that
deterioration in our transportation system which has been in process
during the past eight years of aggressive monopolization.

The demand for a remedy is loud and urgent. What remedy shall we apply?
Shall the monopoly now breaking down be broken up, or shall we attempt
to patch it up by regulation?

Let us consider first the causes of our present ills.

These ills result from monopoly. But, while the policy of monopoly is
the fundamental cause of the deterioration of our transportation system,
it has itself bred subsidiary causes; and of these subsidiary causes
excessive bigness is probably the most potent.

Excessive bigness often attends monopoly; but the evils of excessive
bigness are something distinct from and additional to the evils of
monopoly. A business may be too big to be efficient without being a
monopoly; and it may be a monopoly and yet (so far as concerns size) may
be well within the limits of efficiency. Unfortunately, the so-called
New Haven system suffers from both excessive bigness and from monopoly.

## THE MONOPOLY

The New Haven monopoly of transportation in New England, now
substantially complete, rests upon ownership or legal control of an
effective interest in:

*First*. Substantially all the railroads in Maine, New Hampshire,
Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Connecticut, except the Grand Trunk\'s
line from Canada to New London and to Portland, the Canadian Pacific
Line through northern Maine, and the Bangor and Aroostook.

*Second*. Substantially all the trolley lines in Rhode Island and
Connecticut, the most important in western and central Massachusetts,
and some in Maine, New Hampshire, Vermont and New York.

*Third*. Substantially all the steamship lines from any of the New
England States to New York or Philadelphia or Baltimore.

The control which the New Haven, a privately owned corporation, holds
over Boston is without parallel in the whole world. All railroads
entering Boston (unless the Boston, Revere Beach and Lynn be called a
railroad and is independent) are either owned by the New Haven, or
controlled legally or through an effective interest; for it has such a
partnership interest also in the Boston and Albany. All the coastwise
steamship lines sailing from Boston for New York, Philadelphia or
Baltimore are owned or controlled legally or influenced through an
effective interest.

Among the American cities Boston ranks second in assessed wealth. Among
the American seaports Boston ranks second in foreign commerce. Among the
American centers of population Boston (including suburbs) ranks fourth.
But Boston, alone of all the large cities of the United States, is in
the grip of a railroad monopoly. The following is the position of the
other large cities:

## RAILROAD SYSTEMS

Â 

  --- ----
New York has 8
Chicago has 19
Philadelphia has 3
St. Louis has 17
Cleveland has 5
Baltimore has 3
Pittsburg has 5
Detroit has 7
Buffalo has 9
San Francisco has 4
Milwaukee has 5
Cincinnati has 6
Newark has 5
New Orleans has 5
Minneapolis has 8
Kansas City has 10
Louisville has 7
Denver has 6
Seattle has 5
One railroad system has Boston
  --- ----

## A DELUSIVE COMPARISON

Advocates of monopoly urge that the days of competition are passed; that
to insist upon competition is to go backward, not forward; that (at
least as to railroads and our public-service corporations) the path of
progress lies in regulation, and that this remedy should be relied upon
with respect to the New Haven.

The contention rests upon a half-truth and a misconception. Undoubtedly
we need effective regulation of railroads as well as of other
public-service corporations, whether they be monopolies or competitive
concerns.

Undoubtedly, also, certain public services, local in character, like
those supplying gas or water, will, on the whole, be best performed by
monopolies, if effectively regulated; or, as in the case of the
telephone, may as monopolies best serve the public convenience. But the
instances of desirable private monopolies are exceptional; and the
transportation service (other than local) is not within the exception.
The difference is clearer.

1\. When a local gas company (as in Boston) is given a monopoly, it is a
monopoly only in gas, and not a monopoly in all lighting. The gas
company is subjected to the competition of electric light and to the
competition of oil.

Indeed, where a monopoly in gas and electric lighting is combined in the
same company, the results are clearly less satisfactory than they are
where the gas company and the electric light company compete vigorously
(as in Boston) with one another.

2\. There is also this marked difference between such a local monopoly,
even if complete, and a monopoly like the New Haven:

A local monopoly, like a gas company or electric light company or a
street railway company, is but a creature, a servant of the State, and
as such wholly subject to the control of the State within which it is
situated.

In Massachusetts, where such local monopolies have been satisfactorily
conducted, the company has at all times been absolutely subject to the
will, not only of the State, but even largely to the will of the
particular community which it serves.

Its whole business is dependent upon the license to use the streets; and
this license is terminable at the will of the people. In other words,
the street railways of Massachusetts and the gas and electric light
companies of Massachusetts are practically permitted to perform as
agents of the State public functions during good behavior.

If they do not properly serve the community, the community may at any
time terminate their franchises or license without even paying
compensation.

Furthermore, these Massachusetts public-service corporations cannot
issue any securities without the consent of the Commonwealth. They
cannot pass under the control of a foreign corporation without their
charter becoming liable to forfeiture. The control of the State is
absolute.

This reserved power in the community is an effective weapon by which the
community may compel the corporation to supply the service it needs.
Thus it compelled the West End Street Railway to lease the Tremont
Street subway and to remove the surface tracks from Tremont Street. It
compelled the Boston Elevated to lease the line beyond Forest Hills and
give five-cent fare to Boston. It compelled recently the consolidation
of the West End and Elevated and the leasing of the Boylston Street and
Dorchester subways. Eighty-cent gas and the recent satisfactory gas
service were obtained by a like struggle and the threat of municipal gas
as an alternative.

## THE NEW HAVEN SUPERIOR TO OUR LAW

Between a street railway, gas or electric light monopoly, existing under
such conditions, and the New Haven monopoly in transportation there is
no real resemblance. The New Haven claims rights under the laws of seven
States and, in addition, under acts of Congress. Massachusetts has,
except in strictly local matters, no effective legal control over the
company. Neither the Massachusetts legislature, nor any commission it
may create, can regulate the New Haven in any of its important
functions. Any statute attempting to do so would be void as interfering
with interstate commerce.

And Massachusetts cannot enforce her will even as to intrastate matters,
as it does in the case of street railways, gas and other street-using
corporations; because the railroad franchises cannot be taken without
paying compensation. Massachusetts prohibited the New Haven from issuing
stock without the consent of the railroad commissioners. The New Haven
disobeyed the laws with impunity. Massachusetts laws prohibited the New
Haven from issuing more bonds than stock. The New Haven disobeyed the
laws with impunity. Massachusetts laws prohibited the New Haven from
acquiring steamship lines. The New Haven disobeyed the laws with
impunity. Massachusetts laws prohibited the New Haven from consolidating
with other companies. The New Haven disobeyed the laws with impunity. In
each instance these prohibitions were a part of Massachusetts\' plan for
regulating railroad companies; but the New Haven claimed the right to
act under the laws of another State, and successfully defied
Massachusetts.

And the recent Grand Trunk incident furnished another and a striking
instance of our inability to regulate this monopoly. The New Haven,
having been unable to prevent the passing of the enabling act providing
for this competition, nullified the law by an arrangement with the Grand
Trunk.

## A DIVIDED LOYALTY

There is, however, another and very important respect in which local
monopolies, like gas and electric light and street railways, differ from
the interstate monopolies. The prosperity of the local monopoly is
absolutely dependent upon the prosperity of the community in which it is
situated. Self-interest demands that the company owning the local
monopoly should endeavor to advance the prosperity of the community
which it serves. But in the case of the New Haven monopoly there are
several communities served and there is a distinct diversity of interest
between those communities. The interests of Boston and northern New
England are in many respects directly opposed to the interests of New
York City. The interests of our merchants and manufacturers are in many
respects directly opposed to the interests of the Wall Street
financiers, who control the destinies of the New Haven. Northern New
England might suffer by the New Haven serving New York, Connecticut and
Rhode Island in preference to this Commonwealth. The prosperity of
Massachusetts and northern New England is at present absolutely
dependent on the New Haven; but the New Haven\'s prosperity is not
absolutely dependent upon Massachusetts and northern New England.

## THE LIMITS OF REGULATION

The policy of regulating public-service companies is sound; but it must
not be overworked. The scope of any possible effective regulation of an
interstate railroad, either by the federal or by State commissions, is
limited to a relatively narrow sphere. Regulation may prevent positive
abuses, like discriminations, or rebating, or excessive rates.
Regulation may prevent persistent disregard of definite public demands,
like that for specific trains or for stops at certain stations.
Regulation may compel the correction of definite evils, like the use of
unsanitary cars. But regulation cannot make an inefficient business
efficient. Regulation cannot convert a poorly managed railroad into a
well-managed railroad. Regulation cannot supply initiative or energy.
Regulation cannot infuse into railroad executives the will to please the
people. Regulation cannot overcome the anÃ¦mia or wasting-sickness which
attends monopoly. Regulation may curb, but it cannot develop the action
of railroad officials. For no commission, however broad its powers,
however able, fearless and diligent its members, can perform the
functions of general manager and the board of directors of a railroad
system; or supply the incentive and the eagerness to please the public
and that development which results from the necessities of competition.
It is to lack of efficiency, to the lack of appreciation of the
community\'s needs, and to the lack of this eagerness to please its
customers that our demoralized transportation service is in large
measure due.

For instance, bad freight service has seriously impaired the prosperity
of New England. Deliveries of freight have been almost incredibly slow
and unreliable. The effect upon the business concerns has been very
serious. Success of individual businesses has been imperilled.
Prosperity of all New England has been retarded. All this has happened
in a period in which the country has been blessed with an able, fearless
and upright Interstate Commerce Commission, possessing broad legal
powers. The recent hearings before that commission have disclosed the
evils from which the community suffers. The recent public disclosures
will undoubtedly result in correcting some specific evils which have
been pointed out; but the commission cannot by any order make the
railroads give the shippers good service. Regulation cannot produce
efficient and enlightened railroad operation in the interests of the
public; and without that the community cannot get satisfactory service.

The efficiency of regulation, even within its acknowledged sphere, is
quite limited. The Bridgeport wreck of 1911 was caused, as the
Interstate Commerce Commission found, by the maintenance of a short
crossover. It was undoubtedly lack of judgment in the railroad
originally to establish such a short crossover. When the short crossover
was found to be the cause of the accident, the commission recommended
its abolition. The recommendation was ignored by the railroad; the
change was not made. And the terrible Westport accident of 1912 was the
result of ignoring the recommendation. The Interstate Commerce
Commission surely performed its full duty of regulation in this
connection; and yet the community was subjected to this serious result
of inefficiency in railroading.

## THE NEED OF COMPETITION

No one has recognized more fully than members of the Interstate Commerce
Commission the limitation of accomplishment through railroad regulation.
No one recognizes better than they the continuing need of competition to
secure satisfactory service.

This appears very clearly from Chairman Prouty\'s letter to the
President, written March 12, 1912, referring to the proposal to permit
railroad-owned ships to use the Panama Canal, but referring generally to
all water transportation, in which he says:

\"The commission, after consideration, is unanimously of the opinion
that if the waterways of this country are to be of any substantial
benefit in the way of reducing the rates of transportation, it is
absolutely essential that rail carriers be prohibited from owning or
controlling, directly or indirectly, competing water carriers.\"

Congress, also, by an overwhelming majority, testified to its conviction
that the Interstate Commerce Commission was right in declaring such
competition in transportation to be essential to our prosperity; for it
not only prohibited railroad-owned steamships from using the Panama
Canal, but insisted upon inserting in the Canal Act a general provision
by which all railroads engaged in interstate commerce are prohibited
from owning or operating any competing water lines on any routes after
July 1, 1914, unless the commission should, upon investigation of the
particular line, find that is operation is of advantage to the
convenience and commerce of the people; or that such service would not
retard competition by other vessels on the water route under
consideration.

Of course, competition between carriers is not synonymous with
rate-cutting. New England longs for good service even more than for
lower rates. The Interstate Commerce Commission may effectively prevent
increases in rates; and may protect the community by enforcing
reductions.

But even in its admitted field care must always be taken not to overwork
the Interstate Commerce Commission by creating conditions of monopoly
under which burdens would develop greater than it could probably bear.
The excellent work which the Commission has so far done has been
possible only because existing competition between railroads has to a
large extent produced development and supply of reasonable facilities,
and, in the main, reasonable rates; each railroad acting, to a certain
extent, as a check upon the other. Such is the condition in Wisconsin,
where the best success in regulation of railroads has been attained. To
abandon competition in transportation and rely upon regulation as a
safeguard against the evils of monopoly would be like surrendering
liberty and regulating despotism.

## THE MONOPOLY UNCONTROLLABLE

The Grand Trunk incident shows clearly that a powerful interstate
monopoly like the New Haven with its banking affiliations is
uncontrollable, so long as the monopoly is allowed to continue. The
people of Massachusetts and of Rhode Island, after some unsatisfactory
experience with the New Haven\'s monopoly of transportation, determined
to secure competition. The Boston Chamber of Commerce and other trade
organizations of these States insisted that the Grand Trunk should be
permitted to secure an independent entrance into Boston and into
Providence. The governors of these sovereign States, the mayors of their
chief cities, recommended the necessary legislation. The legislatures,
after long deliberation, passed the required acts in spite of all the
opposition which the New Haven could interpose. Construction of the line
through Massachusetts to Providence was commenced, and, despite the
obstacles presented by the New Haven, was nearing completion. Contracts
were let for the new line of Grand Trunk boats from Providence to New
York. Surveys for the Grand Trunk railroad into Boston were being made.

Then the powerful New Haven monopoly, by threat, bribe or other
influence, stopped construction and secured the abandonment of the
competitive project. The laws of Massachusetts and of Rhode Island were
nullified; the will of the people of two supposedly sovereign States was
defied; and there is no power of regulation now possessed by, or which
can be conferred upon, any State railroad commission or the Interstate
Commerce Commission which could prevent or redress such a wrong to the
people.

## THE CURSE OF BIGNESS

But even if it were possible to really regulate the New Haven monopoly,
efficient and satisfactory transportation would be unattainable because
the New Haven suffers not only from monopoly, but also from excessive
bigness.

The New Haven is not strictly a system; it is an agglomeration of
properties. Its huge bulk was attained, not by normal growth, but by
acquisition. It represents not so much a development as a putting
together. Furthermore, it is an agglomeration, not of railroads merely,
but of railroads, steamships, trolleys and other properties.

Here are some of the properties which the New Haven railroad, with 2,006
miles of line has purchased or acquired control of, or an effective
interest in, during the last eight years of aggressive monopolization:

Â 

  --- ---------------
\(1\) RAILROADS MILES OF LINE
Boston and Maine system 2,449
Montpelier and Wells River and the Barre railroads 66
Maine Central system 1,410
Sandy River and Rangeley Lakes 102
Bridgeton and Saco 21
Sebasticook and Moosehead 16
Rangeley Lakes and Megantic 11
New York, Ontario and Western 513
Central New England 272
New York, Westchester and Boston 274
4934
  --- ---------------

These railroads have a total of 7,245 miles of track.

The New Haven acquired also:

1\. One-half the New York Central holdings of preferred stock (and would
have acquired all but for adverse legal proceedings) in the Rutland
Railroad, with 415 miles of line.

2\. One-half interest in the results of operating the Boston and Albany,
with 392 miles of line.

  --- -----------------------------------
\(2\) TROLLEYS MILES OF LINE

In Connecticut, 37 trolley lines 773

In Rhode Island, 12 trolleys 347

In Massachusetts, 19 trolley lines\ 481
(The New Haven claims to have\
divested it self of control of a\
large part of these.)

In New York, 3 trolley lines 58

In New Hampshire, 2 trolley lines 47

In Vermont, 1 trolley line 21

                                      1,727
  --- -----------------------------------

\(3\) STEAMSHIP LINES

Joy Line.\
Hartford and New York Transportation Company.\
Maine Steamship Line (now merged in Eastern Steamship Company).\
Metropolitan Steamship Company (now merged in Eastern Steamship
Company).\
Boston and Philadelphia (now merged in Merchants\' and Miners\').

To acquire the mere control or interest in new properties, the New Haven
invested, during the last ten years of aggressive monopolization, about
\$250,000,000. In that period the New Haven increased its own
capitalization and other direct and contingent liabilities nearly
sixfold, or from \$87,000,000 to \$530,000,000.

Before the New Haven acquired control of these properties they were in
large part operated independently and by different groups of executive
officers. Since the acquisition, and as a necessary incident of
incorporating them into the so-called system, a few New Haven officials
have, in effect, been charged with the management of them all. For a few
men to manage all these properties well surpasses human capacity.

## INTENSIVE RAILROADING

The bulk of the New Haven properties is huge; but it is not the huge
bulk alone which renders impossible the task of efficient management.
The New Haven properties are diverse in character and widely scattered;
but it is not these facts which present the most serious difficulty in
their operation. The insuperable obstacle to efficient management of the
New Haven properties, in addition to the status of monopoly, lies in the
fact that almost each one of these many diverse properties, agglomerated
into a socalled system, presents many problems which are not only
important, but are individual to the particular property and to the
particular community served by it. That results necessarily from the
conditions surrounding transportation in New England.

For the solution of each of these problems there is required, not only
separate investigation, but careful weighing of relevant facts. In order
to secure unity of purpose and action, all these problems must be passed
upon ultimately by the same chief executives. Now, the number of such
decisions which any man can make, however able and hard-working he may
be, and the extent of supervision which any man can effectively apply,
are obviously very limited. Organization may accomplish much in
extending the scope of work possible for an executive; but there is an
obvious limit, also, to the efficacy of organization; for the success of
the whole enterprise demands that the executive must be able to
comprehend all the important facts bearing upon the properties. Real
efficiency in any business in which conditions are ever changing must
ultimately depend, in large measure, upon the correctness of judgment
formed from day to day on the problems as they arise. And it is an
essential of sound judgment that the executives have time to know and
correlate the facts.

## MERE CHANGE OF MANAGEMENT NO REMEDY

Men of good judgment must necessarily make many errors if they work
under the conditions with which the high New Haven officials have been
confronted during the past eight years. If the conditions remain the
same, the New Haven cannot, by removing present officials and
substituting others, escape from making similar errors in the future;
nor can we aid the matter materially by regulation, state or federal.
Present ills are due, in the main, to the fundamental error of adopting
the policy of monopoly. The ills can be remedied only by abandoning that
policy. Present conditions make bad management inevitable. Bad
management of the New Haven can be avoided in the future only by
changing the controlling conditions under which the properties are to be
operated; and that involves reducing the so-called system to a size
consistent with efficiency, and subjecting those who manage it to that
constant incentive and education which come from having \"to make good\"
in competitive business.

It has been urged that the so-called New Haven system is not too large;
and some other large railroad systems have been referred to as evidence
of this. It may be answered, in the first place, that none of those
systems are monopolies; and that few of them own any trolleys and
relatively few are operating steamship lines. Furthermore, several of
them appear also to have exceeded the limit of greatest efficiency. But
no comparison can properly be made between other large systems and the
so-called New Haven system. With a few notable exceptions the size of
most of the other systems was, in the main attained by gradual growth.
Their main line was built, then extended, and branches were constructed
in various directions in obedience largely to actual necessities of the
States or of the railroads. Their problems were important and were
difficult; but as compared with the problems arising from operation in
New England they were relatively few and simple. In the West the same
problem is repeated on many parts of the line; there a general rule can
frequently be laid down. Here nearly every grave problem is an
individual one. New England railroading is done in an old and settled
community; the population is congested; and here, to a certain extent,
conditions became fixed even before the days of railroading.

The great growth of population and of business in New England has
brought with it many problems, individual in character, but which are
nevertheless of a nature to require consideration by the high
executives. Indeed, this difference between the railroad situation in
other parts of the country and that of the East has been frequently
urged by the railroad officials themselves. Railroading, to be done
efficiently and prosperously in New England, must be done far more
intensively than in newer sections of the country. New England
railroading may, perhaps, be likened to our intensive market gardening,
or to tobacco growing in the Connecticut valley, in contrast to the big
wheat farms of the West.

## ENDING OF MONOPOLY IMPERATIVE

Even if the size of the so-called New Haven system were much reduced,
yet the efficient service demanded by the public could not be attained
so long as a monopoly in transportation is permitted to exist.
Competition, except in purely local traffic, subject to complete
regulation as above described, should be introduced so far as possible
everywhere. But, as above explained, this does not mean rate-cutting.
Competition is not possible everywhere on the New Haven system; but a
broad field of healthy competition is open to New England. Bordering
largely on the Atlantic Ocean, blessed with fine harbors, we should have
the full benefit of water competition and of the low rates which are
consistent with reasonable profit to those engaged in water
transportation. Being a thickly settled community, we should have the
full benefit of competition through interurban electrics. The New Haven
has robbed New England of the benefit both of water competition and of
trolley competition.

In order to attain its transportation monopoly the New Haven bought up
at huge cost not only competing railroads, but water and trolley lines.
To secure satisfactory transportation conditions in New England, water
and trolley competition must be reestablished. Connecticut, Rhode Island
and Massachusetts should insist upon separate ownership of rail, water
and trolley lines, which are naturally competitive.

But the establishment of competing water and trolley lines would not
afford complete relief. Neither steamships nor trolleys could break the
monopoly in a large part of our traffic. To do that railroad competition
is essential. To this end the Boston and Maine must be completely
separated from the New Haven. Such separation would reinstate important
competition in transportation within the State; and without such
separation adequate competition is unattainable in the most important
interstate traffic; for instance, to Chicago, St. Louis and the West.

Without establishing an important absolutely independent railroad system
in our community, the New Haven and the community will be deprived of
that opportunity of comparing standards of operation which is essential
to the best accomplishment in any department of business.

Unless the Boston and Maine is separated from the New Haven,
Massachusetts and northern New England will be without a railroad system
wholly devoted to its interests.

## LAWS

The recent decision of the United States Supreme Court, holding the
Union-Southern Pacific merger illegal, may lead the administration to
bring proceedings to end this huge New Haven monopoly by reinstituting
the proceedings commenced in 1908 by President Roosevelt and dismissed
by the new administration in 1909, after the Boston Railroad Holding
Company bill was passed. And so far as concerns the water lines, relief
may also be afforded through the Interstate Commerce Commission under
the provisions of the recent act of Congress.

But proper transportation conditions will probably not be secured unless
the States also take appropriate action. The States can effect the
separation of the trolley lines. Rhode Island seems inclined to acquire
and complete the railroad line which the Grand Trunk was induced by the
New Haven to abandon. And at present the most certain and expeditious
method of securing the separation of the Boston and Maine from the New
Haven appears to be for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to exercise
the right reserved to it in the Massachusetts act of 1909, incorporating
the Boston Railroad Holding Company (the New Haven\'s subsidiary which
holds for it the Boston and Maine stock). That act provides:

\"The Commonwealth may at any time, by act of the Legislature upon one
year\'s notice, take or require the securities.\"

The New Haven is clearly bound by the provisions of this statute, as the
act expressly provides:

\"The acquisition by any railroad corporation\ ... of any bonds, stocks,
notes, or other evidence of indebtedness of said Boston Railroad Holding
Company shall be deemed to be an acceptance by said railroad corporation
of all the terms and provisions of this act.\"

The legislature of Massachusetts passed the holding company bill upon
the assurance of Governor Draper and of the Attorney General that by so
doing the Commonwealth would acquire potential control over the Boston
and Maine. The aggressions of private monopoly compel it now to exercise
this reserved power to take the stock. After the Commonwealth has
acquired the stock, it may retain the same and assume the responsibility
of a majority owner in a corporation to choose its managing officials;
or it may transfer the stock under proper safeguards to others, who will
operate it in the interest of Massachusetts and northern New England.
But action by the State to take over the stock seems necessary now.

\"A condition and not a theory confronts us.\"
