# True Americanism[^23/1]


[^23/1]: Address of Louis D. Brandeis at Faneuil Hall, Boston. July 5, 1915.

Â 

*Ladies and gentlemen*:\--

*E pluribus unum* \-- out of many one, \-- was the motto adopted by the
founders of the Republic when they formed a union of the thirteen
States. To these we have added, from time to time, thirty-five more. The
founders were convinced, as we are, that a strong nation could be built
through federation. They were also convinced, as we are, that in
America, under a free government, many peoples would make one nation.
Throughout all these years we have admitted to our country and to
citizenship immigrants from the diverse lands of Europe. We had faith
that thereby we could best serve ourselves and mankind. This faith has
been justified. The United States has grown great. The immigrants and
their immediate descendants have proved themselves as loyal as any
citizens of the country. Liberty has knit us closely together as
Americans. Note the common devotion to our Country\'s emblem expressed
at the recent Flag Day celebration in New York by boys and girls
representing more than twenty different nationalities warring abroad.

On the Nation\'s birthday it is customary for us to gather together for
the purpose of considering how we may better serve our country. This
year we are asked to address ourselves to the newcomers and to make this
Fourth of July what has been termed Americanization Day.

## Americanization

What is Americanization? It manifests itself, in a superficial way, when
the immigrant adopts the clothes, the manners and the customs generally
prevailing here. Far more important is the manifestation presented when
he substitutes for his mother tongue, the English language as the common
medium of speech. But the adoption of our language, manners and customs
is only a small part of the process. To become Americanized, the change
wrought must be fundamental. However great his outward conformity, the
immigrant is not Americanized unless his interests and affections have
become deeply rooted here. And we properly demand of the immigrant even
more than this. He must be brought into complete harmony with our ideals
and aspirations and cooperate with us for their attainment. Only when
this has been done, will he possess the national consciousness of an
American.

I say \"he must be brought into complete harmony.\" But let us not
forget that many a poor immigrant comes to us from distant lands,
ignorant of our language, strange in tattered clothes and with jarring
manners, who is already truly American in this most important sense; who
has long shared our ideals and who, oppressed and persecuted abroad, has
yearned for our land of liberty and for the opportunity of abiding in
the realization of its aims.

## American Ideals

What are the American ideals? They are the development of the individual
for his own and the common good; - the development of the individual
through liberty and the attainment of the common good through democracy
and social justice.

Our form of government, as well as humanity, compels us to strive for
the development of the individual man. Under universal suffrage (soon to
be extended to women) every voter is a partner of the State. Unless the
rulers have, in the main, education and character and are free men, our
great experiment in democracy must fail. It devolves upon the State,
therefore, to fit its rulers for their task. It mus provide not only
facilities for development, but the opportunity of using them. It must
not only provide opportunity; it must stimulate the desire to avail of
it. Thus we are compelled to insist upon observance of what we somewhat
vaguely term the American standard of living; we become necessarily our
brothers\' keepers.

## The American Standard of Living

What does this standard imply? In substance, the exercise of those
rights which our Constitution guarantees; the right to life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness. Life, in this connection, means living not
existing; liberty, freedom in things industrial as well as political;
happiness includes, among other things, that satisfaction which can come
only through the full development and utilization of one\'s faculties.
In order that men may live and not merely exist \-- in order that men
may develop their faculties, they must have a reasonable income; they
must have health and leisure. High wages will not meet the worker\'s
need unless employment be regular. The best of wages will not compensate
for excessively long working hours which undermine health. And working
conditions may be so bad as to nullify the good effects of high wages
and short hours. The essentials of American citizenship are not
satisfied by supplying merely the material needs or even wants of the
worker.

Every citizen must have education \-- broad and continuous. This
essential of citizenship is not met by an education which ends at the
age of 14 \-- or even at 18 or 22. Education must continue throughout
life. A country cannot be governed well by rulers whose education and
mental development is limited to their attendance at the common school.
Whether the education of the citizen in later years is to be given in
classes or from the public platform, or is to be supplied through
discussion in the lodges and the trade unions, or is to be gained from
the reading of papers, periodicals, and books, - in any case freshness
of mind is indispensable to its attainment. And to the preservation of
freshness of mind a short workday is as essential as adequate food and
proper conditions of working and living. The worker must, in other
words, have leisure. But leisure does not imply idleness. It means
ability to work not less but more \-- ability to work at some thing
besides breadwinning \-- ability to work harder while working at
breadwinning, and ability to work more years at breadwinning. Leisure,
so defined, is an essential of successful democracy.

Furthermore the citizen in a successful democracy must not only have
education; he must be free. Men are not free if dependent industrially
upon the arbitrary will of another. Industrial liberty on the part of
the worker cannot, therefore, exist if there be overweening industrial
power. Some curb must be placed upon overweening industrial power. Some
curb must be placed upon capitalistic combination. Nor will even this
curb be effective unless the workers cooperate, as in trade unions.
Control and cooperation are both essential to industrial liberty.

And if the American is to be fitted for his task as ruler, he must have
besides education and industrial liberty, also some degree of financial
independence. Our existing industrial system is converting an ever
increasing percentage of the population into wage earners; and
experience teaches us that a large part of these become at some time
financial dependents, by reason of sickness, accident, invalidity,
superannuation, unemployment, or premature death of the breadwinner of
the family. Contingencies like these which are generally referred to in
the individual case as misfortunes, are now recognized as ordinary
incidents in the life of the wage earner. The need of providing
indemnity against financial losses from such ordinary contingencies in
the workingman\'s life, has become apparent, and is already being
supplied in other countries, The standard worthy to be called American
implies some system of social insurance.

And since the child is the father of the man, we must bear constantly in
mind that the American standard of living cannot be attained or
preserved unless the child is not only well fed, but well born; unless
he lives under conditions wholesome morally as well as physically;
unless he is given education adequate both in quantity and in character
to fit him for life\'s work.

## The Distinctly American

Such are our ideals and the standard of living we have erected for
ourselves. But what is there in these ideals which is peculiarly
American? Many nations seek to develop the individual man for himself
and for the common good. Some are as liberty-loving as we. Some pride
themselves upon institutions more democratic than our own. Still others,
less conspicuous for liberty or democracy, claim to be more successful
in attaining social justice. And we are not the only nation, which
combines love of liberty, with the practice of democracy and a longing
for social justice. But there is one feature in our ideals and practices
which is peculiarly American. It is inclusive brotherhood.

Other countries, while developing the individual man, have assumed that
their common good would be attained only if the privileges of
citizenship in them should be limited practically to natives or to
persons of a particular nationality. America, on the other hand, has
always declared herself for equality of nationalities, as well as for
equality of individuals. It recognized racial equality as an essential
of full human liberty and true brotherhood, and that it is the
complement of democracy. It has, therefore, given like welcome to all
the peoples of Europe.

Democracy rests upon two pillars; One, the principle that all men are
equally entitled to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness; and the
other, the conviction that such equal opportunity will most advance
civilization. Aristocracy on the other hand denies both these
postulates. It rests upon the principle of the superman. It willingly
subordinates the many to the few, and seeks to justify sacrificing the
individual by insisting that civilization will be advanced by such
sacrifices.

The struggles of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries both in peace
and in war were devoted largely to overcoming the aristocratic position
as applied to individuals. In establishing the equal right of every
person to development, it became clear that equal opportunity for all
involves this necessary limitation: Each man may develop himself so far,
but only so far, as his doing so will not interfere with the exercise of
a like right by all others. Thus liberty came to mean the right to enjoy
life, to acquire property, to pursue happiness in such manner and to
such extent only as the exercise of the right in each is consistent with
the exercise of a like right by every other of our fellow citizens.
Liberty thus defined underlies twentieth century democracy. Liberty thus
defined exists in a large part of the western world. And even where this
equal right of each individual has not yet been accepted as a political
right, its ethical claim is gaining recognition.

America, dedicated to liberty and the brotherhood of man, rejected the
aristocratic principle of the superman as applied to peoples as it
rejected it as applied to individuals. America has believed that each
race had something of peculiar value which it can contribute to the
attainment of those high ideals for which it is striving. America has
believed that we must not only give to the immigrant the best that we
have, but must preserve for America the good that is in the immigrant
and develop in him the best of which he is capable. America has believed
that in differentiation, not in uniformity, lies the path of progress.
It acted on this belief; it has advanced human happiness, and it has
prospered.

## War and Peace

On the other hand the aristocratic theory as applied to peoples survived
generally throughout Europe. It was there assumed by the stronger
countries that the full development of one people necessarily involved
its domination over another, and that only by such domination would
civilization advance. Strong nationalities assuming their superiority
came to believe that they possessed the divine right to subject other
peoples to their sway; and the belief in the existence of such a right
ripened into a conviction that there was also a duty to exercise it. The
Russianizing of Finland, the Prussianizing of Poland and Alsace, the
Magyarizing of Croatia, the persecution of the Jews in Russia and
Rumania are the fruits of this arrogant claim of superiority; and that
claim is also the underlying cause of the present war.

The movements of the last century have proved that whole peoples have
individuality no less marked than that of the single person; that the
individuality of a people is irrepressible, and that the misnamed
internationalism which seeks the obliteration of nationalities or
peoples is unattainable. The new nationalism adopted by America
proclaims that each race or people, like each individual, has the right
and duty to develop, and that only through such differentiated
development will high civilization be attained. Not until these
principles of nationalism, like those of democracy are generally
accepted, will liberty be fully attained, and minorities be secure in
their rights. Not until then can the foundation be laid for a lasting
peace among the nations.

The world longs for an end of this war, and even more for a peace that
will endure. It turns anxiously to the United States, the one great
neutral country, and bids us point the way. And may we not answer: Go
the way of liberty and justice \-- led by democracy and the new
nationalism. Without these \-- international congresses and supreme
courts will prove vain, and disarmament \"The Great Illusion.\"

And let us remember the Poor Parson of whom Chaucer says:
