_Big developmental projects displace large numbers of people and cause psychological, physiological
and sociocultural trauma. Successful resettlement and rehabilitation of the displaced people requires
understanding of the sociological complexities involved. Our experience with large irrigation
projects provides important lessons._

\ 

In several developmental projects across the world, very
large numbers of people are displaced from their
existing habitat and need to be resettled elsewhere.
Most spectacularly from the reservoir spread of major
irrigation and hydroelectric projects, but also from
projects involving mining, the construction of ports,
and the establishment of industrial townships, such
involuntary resettlement involving the disruption and
metamorphosis of entire community life-styles invariably
causes acute distress and impoverishment to large
numbers of the displaced. Even where, in recent years,
this has been belatedly recognized through the
enhanced importance and funding provided for resettlement,
an inadequate understanding of the complexity of
the social processes associated with relocation must
surely limit the success of any administered programme
of resettlement. In this paper I shall argue that such
preliminary epistemologies of the resettlement process
are now emerging, and could be operationally helpful
towards its successful management.

A major irrigation project, in its design and
execution, is typically viewed as a collaborative venture
of engineers, project managers, agricultural scientists,
civil servants, economists, contractors and the farmers
who benefit from irrigation. The resettlement and
eventual rehabilitation of those displaced is, however,
typically seen as a salvage operation, mandated for
implementation, and sought to be accomplished within
managerial and programme parameters very similar to
the rest of the project. However, in much the same way
as research on the sociology of irrigated farming
systems has revealed that the utilization of water is
influenced as much by the adequacy of social
institutions and organizations (underpinned by general
concepts of rules, roles and spontaneous group
formation[^/1]) as by individual capacities for risk-bearing,
the anthropology of resettlement also merits investigation
if administered programmes for involuntary
resettlement are to succeed.

Such an approach is likely to be helpful provided
robust generalizations that arc transferable across
projects emerge. My objective is to consider some of the
conclusions that sociologists who have studied resettlement
have reached, and to relate these insights to the
outcome of the resettlement process in a single major
irrigation project, the Upper Krishna Project (UKP) in
northern Karnataka. The replicability and cultural
adjustability to UKP of generalizations based on
sociologists' field experiences elsewhere constitute,
therefore, a preliminary test of the robustness of the
generalizations.[^/2]

There is, at the outset, a preliminary issue of how
relevant a development project is, for the purpose of
generating sociological enquiry and promoting sociologically
guided planned interventions. Cernea[^/3] argues
forcefully that, despite the project format concentrating
resources on selected priorities, focusing on circumscribed
geographical areas and population groups, and
thereby constituting segmented units of intervention
that bypass 'overall structures', and despite most
sociological enquiry being _evaluative_ of development
results, there are legitimate new entrance points for
sociological knowledge being opened by studying large
projects, which span operational, organizational and
managerial issues. Clearly, large developmental efforts
such as major irrigation projects, which mobilize
extensive external resources and deploy them in a
limited geographical area, must induce rapid social
changes. Sociological analysis that identifies homogeneities
across projects undertaken in culturally dissimilar
milieus ought to be methodologically defensible.

Anthropological perspectives also induce a more
conservative systems view of the development process,
with innovations regarded as ways of reinforcing, rather
than escaping from, existing stable modes of existence.
Such perspectives are strongly influenced by the work
of palaeo-biologists. Romer[^/4], in his explanation of the
origin of land-dwelling vertebrates, argued that the
ancestors of these vertebrates lived in pools of water
that went seasonally dry. Legs developed out of fins in
order to carry them to neighbouring pools and not to
enable them to live on land. In this manner, the need
for stability can be the main impetus for change, and
several sociologists argue that Romer's rule is an apt
metaphor for understanding the development process.
Thus, Kottak[^/5] suggests that successful developmental
projects avoid the "fallacy of over-innovation". In the
same way as the evolution of legs in aquatic creatures
(a feature essential to land life) originated to allow
continued aquatic existence, in a developmental process
(particularly one as disruptive as involuntary resettlement),
individuals, families and social groups innovate
in a manner that seeks to recreate the earlier stabilities.
Such responses to coping with resettlement may
therefore be beneficial, and not antagonistic, to the
success of the resettlement process, and would need to
be incorporated into the development paradigm.

# The Upper Krishna Project

UKP has been conceptualized as a long-term development
programme for irrigating three districts in
northern Karnataka, to be implemented in stages. Stage
I, currently under execution, is being implemented in
three phases. Phase I commenced in the late 1960s,
initially financed exclusively from State Government
budgetary resources, and subsequently from 1978 to
1986, partly by the World Bank.[^/6] Phase II, negotiated
with the Bank in November 1988, has recently begun
implementation, and is scheduled for completion in 1996.[^/7]

The project involves the construction of two dams
(for storage at Almatti, and primarily for diversion at
Narayanpur). The Narayanpur dam was fully constructed
in Phase I and the reservoir water-spread will, with
its maximum water storage, submerge 132 sq. km,
involving 36 villages and farmlands from another 54
villages, affecting in all an estimated 6630 families. The
Almatti dam will be constructed to a partial height of
509 metres during Phase II and will then inundate
129 sq. km of land, affecting about 21,600 families (of
which about 15,500 families are expected to suffer only
temporary submergence of village houses, as the
reservoir levels fluctuate seasonally). Finally, road and
canal construction is expected to affect nearly 11,900
families, most of whom will lose farmlands to varying
extents, but will not be coerced into leaving their
homes.

The Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) programme
during Phase I attempted to relocate families
from 36 villages facing submersion under the Narayanpur
reservoir into 27 Resettlement Centres, besides paying
monetary compensation under the Land Acquisition
Act for all properties lost through submergence. Each
Resettlement Centre incorporated essential community
infrastructure: school buildings, community halls,
gymnasia, playgrounds, panchayat offices, temples and
mosques, The Resettlement Centres were electrified,
internal roads were laid out, and layouts for house
construction were also spaciously provided. Transportation
assistance in relocation was also given, as was
some temporary assistance towards consumption expenditure.
Or the 36 villages proposed for relocation,
only one village has hitherto not shifted and some
families from 11 other villages are also yet to shift.
(Their houses have hitherto not been submerged as the
water level at the dam has been kept 2 metres below
full reservoir level.) Elsewhere, relocation has been
complete.

Besides, the submergence of these villages and their
associated farmlands, the Narayanpur reservoir spread
also envisaged the submergence of farmlands in another
54 villages. In 1987, the project authorities attempted,
on the basis of a sample study, to assess the extent to
which compensation amounts received by the displaced
for loss of property had been reinvested in farmlands.
The study revealed that an estimated 13% of
compensated families invested in purchase of replacement
farmland. The plight of erstwhile agricultural
labour who owned no farmland and therefore received
no compensation, but who nevertheless lost opportunities
for employment on account of the extensive
farmland submergence, was the most serious. Some
found local employment in project construction, whereas
most migrated out of the area. A large proportion of
landed farmers became landless.

Thereby, although the relocation of the displaced
into Resettlement Centres during Phase I had been
largely accomplished, their economic rehabilitation had
clearly not occurred, and post-relocation asset-ownership
and income levels had fallen sharply. This compelled a
more detailed investigation of the economic impact that
displacement induces, and of whether financial and
organizational support to the displaced ought to be
structured differently during Phase II of UKP.

The resulting policy for Phase II is indeed very
differently framed, and will attempt afresh the economic
rehabilitation of those families displaced during Phase
I, besides the resettlement and rehabilitation of those
who will be displaced during Phase II. As a point of
departure, all families affected are grouped according to
their expected land-holding status _after_ land loss.
Currently, all displaced families are categorized under
five heads: those who have lost _all_ land; those who
retain an _uneconomic_ holding (less than 1.5 hectares)
after land loss; those who retain an _economic_ holding
after land loss; _landless_ families; and those who have
lost their _houses_ but not farmlands.

Just prior to the commencement of Phase II, a Pilot
Project for R&R was implemented, and began in
March 1988. It was to cover families displaced from six
villages already submerged under the Narayanpur
reservoir, where relocation to Resettlement Centres had
occurred in 1980. The Pilot Project was expected to test
the suitability of R&R policy being restructured for
Phase II and the preparedness of the project authorities
in implementing it, while also revealing constraints and
weaknesses, R&R reliefs were to be provided as follows:

Families who had lost all lands were to be given
adequate monetary assistance (as a grant) for purchase
of at least 1.5 hectares of irrigated land (or equivalent
dry land, estimated at 3 hectares), the monetary support
for which would extend up to Rs 30,000.

Families who retained an uneconomic holding after
land loss were entitled to a grant of up to Rs 10,000,
which was expected to fully cover the financing of a
suitable income-generating scheme, and were also
entitled to a draw-down cultivation facility on a long-term
lease basis on the lands acquired from them as
they became available for cultivation seasonally.

Families who retained an economic holding after
land loss were entitled to an income-generating scheme,
with bank finance with a 25% Government subsidy, in
selected and approved sectors such as animal husbandry,
fisheries, poultry, sericulture, irrigation pumping
equipment and petty businesses.

Finally, landless families were entitled to a monetary
grant of Rs 10,000 towards one of two options: the
purchase of half a hectare of irrigated land (or
equivalent dry land), or the acquisition of a suitable
income-generating scheme.

In addition, each family had already been paid
compensation under the Land Acquisition Act for
farmlands lost, houses submerged or otherwise affected,
and any other properties surrendered. Each family
covered by the Pilot Project had already been relocated
in one of two Resettlement Centres. Thus, the objective
of the Pilot Project was to attempt an economic
rehabilitation of families who had resettled at the two
centres eight years earlier in a way that restored their
pre-submergence real income levels.

The Pilot Project began in 1988, and a separate
documentation exists of several aspects of the Project,
the perceptions of those displaced, and a profile of the
six villages as they existed prior to submergence.[^/8] The
design and instrumentalities adopted by the Pilot
Project were chosen with sensitivity to economic and
managerial characteristics of rehabilitation, and in
interacting with the families being assisted, several
issues arose that are more directly rooted in the
sociology of resettlement. These are discussed below.

# Resettlement anthropology and UKP

In assessing the importance of sociocultural and
anthropological variables in an R&R programme where
a large number of villages are submerged and their
inhabitants displaced, I draw upon several facets of the
UKP experience: the impact of the resettlement
programme during Phase 1; the insights emerging from
the Pilot Project implemented during 1988--89, including
the perceptions of those resettled; and the policy for
Phase II, which will underpin the R&R efforts in the
years ahead.[^/9] The insights provided by the sociology of
resettlement are likely to be useful if they can provide
inputs into the design of an R&R policy rather than
constituting mere wisdom by hindsight, and it is such
design inputs that I shall emphasize.[^/10]

## Psychological shock and risk aversion

Perhaps the most widely documented facet of involuntary
relocation is the psychological trauma that people
undergo. In having lost not just houses and lands, but
also the familiarity of their earlier habitat, the displaced
are initially in a state of shock, having exchanged
several centuries of historical continuity for an
unfamiliar Resettlement Centre. Scudder and Colson[^/11]
have documented the many forms that such psychological
stress can take 'the grieving for a lost home'
syndrome; traumatic memories of the actual displacement
(often administered at very short notice) for those
who resettle with success the 'guilt feelings' about
others who have been less successful; and the pervading
anxieties about the future. Families have to be raised in
a new environment and productive systems established
for economic survival. With such acute stress, families
are initially risk-averse, and yet it is they (and not
Government administrators) who must take the major
risks.

In Phase I of UKP, those whose lands, houses and
other assets were lost were provided compensation
under the Land Acquisition Act and encouraged to
reinvest in alternative farmland. A sample study
conducted by the project authorities several years later
revealed that only 13% of compensated families
invested (wisely) in the purchase of alternative farmland.
Although there could be several reasons for this,[^/12] the
dispossessed, when acutely stressed, clearly cannot be
left to their own devices to purchase land. In the UKP
Pilot Project, the use to which compensation amounts
were put was examined in greater detail. Out of 387
families receiving compensation for farmlands lost, only
79 families (or 20%) reinvested in alternative lands, 105
families (27%) used the money for liquidating earlier
debts, 46 families (12%) used the compensation
amounts partly for debt liquidation and partly for
consumption, and a sizeable 157 families (41%) used it
purely for consumption. Psychologically stressed families
clearly give priority to immediate consumption,
followed by debt liquidation. Were they entrepreneurially
inclined risk-takers, they would invest more
strongly in land.

Policy for Phase II is more sensitive to these issues,
and recognizes that economic rehabilitation must be
conceptually distinguished from physical resettlement,
requiring different mechanisms of institutional support
and economic incentives. Nevertheless, the non-land-based
income-generating scheme is seen as a major
instrument of economic rehabilitation, and will be loan-financed
for those who retain an economic land holding
after submergence. Where physical relocation and
economic rehabilitation will need to be simultaneous,
as will be necessary when the Almatti reservoir fills up,
the sanction of several thousand income-generating
schemes will imply that household businesses financed
through debt would need to be commercially successful.
This presupposes strong entrepreneurial instincts and
discounts inadequately that families may be psychologically
stressed. A choice between land-based and
income-generating schemes, if offered to all families,
could help in transcending this problem.

Memories of the trauma of the actual displacement
were recalled by several families who were assisted in
the Pilot Project. Siddapur and Bachihal villages
constituted a single village panchayat and even as the
Narayanpur reservoir water level came up to the
villages, objections intensified and an agitation was
raised against relocation. The police camped in the
villages for five days, and two sub-inspectors of police
(one from Muddebihal and the other from the State
Reserve Police) and a police van were brought in. The
utter finality of permanent submersion finally induced
the relocation of families from these two villages to the
Veereshnagar Resettlement Centre.

## Physiological shock

Although there is inadequate documentation of whether
morbidity and mortality rates increase after involuntary
relocation, Scudder and Colson[^/11] argue that 'there is
little doubt that relocatees often believe that the elderly
in particular are apt to die "of a broken heart"
following removal'. Perceptions of the displaced also
extend to public health having worsened.

The most strident demand among families in the
UKP Pilot Project villages was for more effective
measures for malaria control. In exchanging a river
bank for a Resettlement Centre at the edge of the
reservoir spread, malaria becomes the most dominant
cause of ill health, and efforts at curbing malaria in the
vicinity of the Narayanpur reservoir have had very
marginal impact. Further, malaria eradication is not
seen as part of the R&R effort, and health personnel
continue to report to irrigation engineers in charge of
civil construction, rather than work within the R&R
administration.

Despite the Resettlement Centres being provided
with borewells, there was also a widespread consensus
among the Pilot Project families that the availability of
drinking water had worsened. Earlier, drinking water
was liberally available from the river and from open
wells nearby, whereas borewell water is now inadequate.
These perceptions, too, can only be countered
through a finer calibration of water requirements,
measured not in terms of the number of borewells
drilled but in terms of _per capita_ water availability.
Earlier R&R efforts have thereby probably under-invested
in drinking water supply.

## Sociocultural shock

The submergence of an entire village dislocates kinship
support and the community network, and dismantles
historical associations, religious symbols and myths.
These can never be recreated, and disruption in the
community network can affect leadership patterns and
inter-family dependencies. But can a recognition of this
alter the way in which R&R policy is designed?
Scudder[^/13] reports that in the resettled areas, the
displaced benefit by having 'neighbours from familiar
and relatively similar class or caste and religious or
ethnic backgrounds', and that sociocultural stress is
also contained by families 'changing to familiar
production techniques, customs, and associates during
the initial years'. Thus, R&R policy should strive to
replicate to the extent possible the neighbourhood
networks that existed earlier, as well as to resist
over-innovation in the use of production techniques.
Romer's rule, as a metaphor for successful developmental
projects, has been discussed earlier.

Whereas there has been no systematic assessment of
these issues in UKP in relation to R&R during Phase I.
certain pointers to the future do emerge. Villages do
like to retain their identity, but during Phase I this was
not always recognized. Thus, 36 villages that faced
submergence were sought to be relocated in 27
Resettlement Centres, denying small villages the liberty
to exist independently as distinctive settlements. This is
often justified in terms of limiting infrastructural costs,
but ignores the sociocultural identity of each Village,
Consequently, one village, Palgaldinni, with just 54
families, refused to be relocated, as it was to be merged
with a much larger village into one Resettlement
Centre. It would clearly be desirable to avoid such
sociocultural insensitivity.

Sentiments suggestive of such sociological deprivation
were also apparent in discussion with families
benefiting from the Pilot Project. Relocation had
occurred eight years back, and earlier the villages saw
no crime, they said, whereas today petty crime occurs
periodically. Earlier there was no drought (some
referred to their memories of drought as far back as
1941), whereas lands are more drought-prone today.
Such perceptions of the displaced were particularly
visible as a loss of cultural identity among those who
lived in Bijjur, the largest of the Pilot Project villages.
Fairs and _jatras_, they said, used to be held in the village
at least four or five times in the year, whereas now they
hold them just once.

## Four stages in an R&R process

Not all resettlement processes have been historically
involuntary, nor have they all been accomplished with
Government assistance. Based on a study of different
kinds of resettlement, Scudder[^/13] has proposed a
conceptual framework that divides each such resettlement
process into four (possibly overlapping) stages,
typically lasting at least a generation. These stages
include 1) planning, initial infrastructural development,
and settler recruitment, (ii) transition, (iii) economic
and social development, and (iv) handing over and
incorporation. Scudder argues that every resettlement
process _must_ pass through all four stages, though the
order of the third and fourth stages may be reversed. If
the third stage is bypassed, the community becomes
increasingly impoverished; if the fourth is bypassed, the
community's dependency on the R&R project agency
remains firm.

Clearly, intelligent planning for R&R must attempt
to handle all four stages efficiently, but there has been
little recognition in planning for UKP that such
temporally distinct stages exist. In Phase I, the third
stage was not the explicit concern of the project
administration, and this was sought to be remedied in
six villages in the Pilot Project, and will be extended to
other villages under the Narayanpur reservoir in Phase
II. Government-sponsored economic rehabilitation will
encourage a dependency on the project administration,
and handing over and incorporation will need to
follow. All this demonstrates that the time schedules for
R&R cannot be readily pegged to reservoir submersion
dates guided solely by dam completion deadlines. R&R
has an autonomy, and a momentum of its own, and
although it may be speeded up, it cannot be arbitrarily
telescoped into the time schedules for construction of
civil engineering works. There is little recognition of
this in the planning for Phase II.

## Impact on the host population

When displaced communities are resettled in areas
where a host population exists and has ownership
rights, it is important that the impact of relocation on
the host population be studied, as otherwise excessive
pressure on the environment of the host population
could occur. Cernea[^/14] cites an instance of a resettlement
plan involving three or four displaced villages with a
combined population of 1500--2000, together with
6000--8000 head of livestock, being fitted into a host
village which was already at capacity with 300 people
and their own livestock.

Phase I resettlement in UKP relocated families from
submerged villages into Resettlement Centres, away
from existing villages. This sought to avoid a direct
clash with villages not submerged. Indirectly, however,
the pressure on grazing land for livestock either sets up
a situation for conflict or else leads to degradation of
the environment. Livestock grazing pressures will need
to be more closely assessed in the choice of locations of
Resettlement Centres during Phase II.

## Families are being rehabilitated, and not individuals

In all the four stages of an R&R process, it is the
family, rather than the individual, that is sought to be
rehabilitated. In emphasizing the importance of kinship
support, Scudder[^/13] notes: 'A common mistake is to
focus attention on the male farmer as an individual
rather than as a household head and family member.
The basic building block of any frontier society is the
family, however, which is best viewed as a joint decision-making
and production unit. Both spouses ideally
should be interviewed by settlement authorities prior to
recruitment, since the reluctance or unsuitability of one
spouse can have an adverse effect on productivity and
family stability'.

In most discussions that R&R personnel conducted
during the UKP Pilot Project, men were always at the
forefront as household representatives. Alternative ways
of reaching out to women need to be explored, and the
facilitating role of non-Governmental organizations for
this purpose would need to be developed.

A complicating factor in the Indian context is joint
ownership of land as ancestral property. In UKP it was
common to find several brothers shown as joint owners
of a single survey number of agricultural land in Land
Revenue records, and the brothers may or may not live
in the same household under one roof. Ought they to
be regarded, for R&R, as one family? The answer to this
will depend on whether the household or economic
dependency is the determining criterion, and on
whether the R&R process is also viewed as an
instrument for enhancing the asset base of a joint-family
household. Current policy in UKP defines the
family in a way that makes economic dependency the
determining criterion, though in computing the number
of families displaced, the criterion has not been
rigorously employed: for landed families, the number of
units of land lost has been the basis (and thereby joint
owners of a piece of land would be regarded as just one
family) for landless families, independent households
have been taken to be separate families.

These inconsistencies arise partly because the family
concept is not unambiguous, either in law or in terms of
economic dependency, in a society where most households
do not contain nuclear families. A family is part
of a local convention on how reciprocal and joint
relationships between individuals are to be structured,
and, clearly, this cannot be ensured purely through
legal prescription. More detailed sociological studies of
the family as a unit for receiving R&R assistance are
needed.[^/15]

## Seasonal loss of property

A difficult issue in the design of an R&R policy is the
manner in which seasonal loss of property through
submergence should be treated. During Phase II of
UKP, a one-in-ten-year flood zone for the Almatti
reservoir has been adopted as the basis for defining
R&R liability in respect of houses. If a house is
submerged for even a few hours every ten years, the
house must be acquired and compensation paid, and
the inhabitants moved elsewhere.

Although such a legal liability appears fair, it will
not, however, ensure that inhabitants shift village and
relocate. In the absence of near-permanent submersion,
experience in many projects (including the Narayanpur
reservoir) suggests that inhabitants will not shift.
Relocation is traumatic, as discussed earlier, psychologically,
physiologically and socio-culturally.

Current policy for the Almatti reservoir does not
adequately recognize this dilemma, possibly on account
of inadequate sensitivity to the sociological impulses to
relocation. As I have argued elsewhere, there appear to
be two objectives sought to be combined in specifying a
flood zone of seasonal submersion: the demarcation of
a _safety zone_ within which Government can assume no
liability for life and property after the Project
commences, and a zone from which relocation will
occur if compensation is paid.[^/16] Clearly, the two zones
need not coincide, though much of the planning for
UKP Phase II has assumed that they will. Although I
have argued that special legislation is needed that pays
compensation for houses _conditional_ on the families
moving permanently to higher ground in order to
reconcile the two facets of the flood zone concept (a
conditionality not currently permissible in the Land
Acquisition Act), this too may prove ineffectual unless
such resettlement acquires a voluntary and spontaneous
dimension and is not perceived as uncompromisingly
mandatory.

## The sociology of the project administration

The largest migrants into areas where a large
developmental project is undertaken are the project
administrators, and the sociology of such a project
management team has been little studied, though it is
widely perceived as being inimical to the interests of
those whose lands and houses are submerged. The
construction of dams and several thousand kilometres
of the water conveyance network acquires such an overriding
and unquestionable legitimacy that attempts to
temper such objectives through a pinpointing of
unnecessary distress caused is generally unsuccessful.
Cannot the dam height be lowered a little if several
villages can thereby escape submersion? Cannot the
configuration of canals be designed such that most
farmers who lose lands for canal construction also
benefit through irrigation on retained lands? The
_engineering bias_[^/17] implicit in the inadequate consideration
of these issues further complicates the R&R process.

Such a bias gets reinforced through the dichotomy in
the manner in which large irrigation projects are
administered, with the Irrigation Department entrusted
with project design and civil engineering construction,
and the Command Area Development Authority
(CADA) made responsible for R&R, and with neither
organization provided superintendence over the other.
As each organization has different constituency interests,
the paths of the two diverge readily during project
implementation, with an uneasy overlap between the
social engineering objectives of R&R and the engineering
objectives of dam and canal construction. R&R
activities inevitably acquire secondary importance, and
together with the tensions that they generate, lead to
risk aversion in decision-making among R&R staff
when liberal policy flexibility, even generosity, are
instead called for (see Maradi, Nayak and Patil[^8] for a
documentation of how such risk aversion is induced, in
their discussion of the UKP Pilot Project). Unless
overall project management objectives are more closely
synchronized, R&R will continue to have the feel of an
insensitive salvage operation in the perceptions of those
displaced.


[^/1]: The sociology of irrigated farming systems is discussed, for
instance, in Coward, E. W. Technical and social change in
Currently irrigated regions Rules, roles and rehabilitation, in _Putting
People First: Sociological Variables in Rural Development_
(ed. Cernea, M. M.), Oxford University Press, 1985.

[^/2]: This is admittedly a weak test of robustness. However, if the
Popper criterion (Popper, K. _The Logic of Scientific Discovery_,
Hutchinson, 1959) of falsifiability as providing the demarcation
between science and non-science is accepted, the non-economic
social sciences would need to search for other criteria of
robustness.

[^/3]: Cernea, M. M., 'Entrance points for sociological knowledge in
planned rural development, in _Research in Rural Sociology and
Development_, Vol. 3 (ed. Schwarzweller, H.), JAI Press, 1987.

[^/4]: Romer, A. S., _Man and the Vertebrates_, Yol. 1, 3rd edn. Penguin
Books, 1960.

[^/5]: Kottak, C. P. 'When people don't come first Some sociological
lessons from completed projects' in _Putting People First:
Sociological Variables in Rural Development_ (ed. Cernea, M. M.).
Oxford University Press, 1985.

[^/6]: Through the Karnataka Irrigation Project. See World Bank,
_India: Karnataka Irrigation Project --- Project Completion Report_,
December 1988, for an evaluation of the Project as contained in
its Project Completion Report.

[^/7]: See World Bank, _Staff Appraisal Report India --- Upper Krishna
(Phase II) Irrigation Project_, April 1989, which provides comprehensive
details of Phase II, and of agreements reached during
negotiations.

[^/8]: Maradi, C. M., Nayak, P. J. and Patil, R. S., _Reservoir
Submergence and Rehabilitative Six Villages in the Upper Krishna
Project_, working paper, 1989.

[^/9]: The policy for Phase II is contained in a Karnataka Government
Order of 3 March 1989 as well as in the Revised Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Action Plan of the State Government of March 1989.
It was unchanged as of December 1989 but was expected to
undergo certain changes in subsequent months.

[^/10]: 'If used only as evaluators, sociological knowledge and
sociologists arrive late, long after the other experts have made
their contributions. They seem wise after the fact, and are defined
as persons who only complain about what others have actually
done. Their skills are not brought to beat on ongoing social
action: since the social process tas taken place prior to the
Evaluation study, it cannot be improved or redirected in
retrospect.' (Cennea, 1987).

[^/11]: Scudder, T. and Colson, E. "From welfare to development: A
conceptual framework for the analysis of dislocated people", in
_Involuntary Migration and Resettlement_ (eds. Hansen, A. and
Oliver-Smith, A.). Westview Press, 1982.

[^/12]: These reasons are discussed in Nayak, P. J., _Rehabilitating the
Displaced: Policy Options in the Upper Krishna Project_, working
paper, 1989.

[^/13]: Scudder, T., 'A sociological framework for the analysis of new
land settlements', in _Putting People First: Sociological variables in
Rural Development_ (ed. Cernea, M. M.) Oxford University Press, 1985.

[^/14]: Cernea, M.M. "Involuntary resettlement and development".
_Finance and Development_, September 1988.

[^/15]: The conceptual problems that arise are discussed in greater detail
in Shah, A. M, 'Parameters of family policy in India'. _Economic
and Political Weekly_, vol. XXIV, 20. 10. 1989.

[^/16]: See Nayak, 1989.

[^/17]: See Cerea, 1988.
