The ongoing movement of the _Gond_
tribals in Adilabad district of Andhra
Pradesh against their decades-old exploitation
took a new turn on April  20
when the police opened fire on
their large gathering at Indravelli village,
a cotton trading centre 35 kms
from Adilabad town, killing, according
to official statements, 13 and injuring 9.
The _Gonds_ had gathered in
large numbers at Indravelli in response
to the call of the _Girijan Rythu Coolie
Sangham_ of the _Radical Youth League_,
a wing of the _CPI(ML)_ led by
Kondapalli Sitarayamayya. Permission
had been granted to hold the meeting,
but was cancelled on April 20,
the day the meeting was scheduled,
ostensibly because a "Society for the
protection of Rights of Non-Tribals"
had complained to the police that the
tribals had planned to burn and loot
their houses besides harming their person
and hence also wanted to hold a
counter meeting that very day. The
_Gonds_ who came to attend the gathering
which had been published for
weeks were stopped at the entrance of
the village and asked to disperse since
ban orders were in force that day.
Insisting on their right to hold their
planned and scheduled meeting the
tribals refused to disperse. According
to the Chief Minister, the _Gonds_ were
armed with spears, sickles, sticks and
stone; and according to the Adilabad
District Superintendent of Police, they
also carried with them chilli powder.
The SP, Adilabad, claims that the police
fired on the crowd after a few rounds
of teargassing proved ineffective, and
after it attacked the 30 policemen and
five officials, spearing to death one
policeman and seriously injuring all
the officials (who were however not
treated medically). According to the
Chief Minister, the police resorted to
firing after the lathi-charge proved ineffective;
and the Home Minister has
claimed that the officials had first persuaded
the _Gonds_ to disperse, but that
the _Gonds_ had regrouped and attacked
the policemen and officials, being instigated
to do so by the 'extremists'
hiding in the nearby villages. All these
versions were doled out separately on
different occasions.

In support of the claims that 'extremists'
had instigated the attack, the
authorities flaunted copies of pamphlets
and the 'extremist' group's official
mouthpiece, _Kranti_. Indeed, the Home
Minister has claimed that the residents
of Utnoor _taluk_ have been clamouring
for declaring the _taluk_ as a 'disturbed
area', and that government would
favourably consider the request. The
Chief Minister too has said that frustrated
by the massive efforts of the
government to uplift the _Gonds_
through their numerous development
programmes, the 'extremists' had instigated
the _Gonds_ to violence. In fact,
pamphlets only demand return of lands
snatched away by the _non-Gonds_ and
the forest department; right to tree
felling and cultivation in forests; and
implementation of the 1964 Act banning
tribals selling their lands to non-tribals
in _notified tribal areas_. Both the
pamphlets and the magazine contain
references to the exploiting sections of
non-tribals in harsh terms as well as
_anti-CPI_ and _anti-CPI(M)_ references
and their collusion with the exploiters.
But there is no incitement to violence
even against the non-tribals in the
village.

# LIES GALORE

A week spent by this correspondent
in the troubled area and nearby villages
gave the lie to all these inconsistent
stories doled out by the
official sources and vested interests.
Contrary to these reports, there were
nearly two dozen armed police camps
of six to ten platoons each in the district.
In fact, an armed camp of seven
platoons has been located in the local
Zilla Parishad High School on the
main road passing through the village,
since early this year. The entire police
force in the district was summoned
to Indravelli village on April 19. The
alleged failure of police intelligence is
also not borne out by facts. The
meeting was called by the _Radical
Youth League_'s _Girijan Rythu Coolie
Sangham_ sometime in March and a
massive poster campaign was carried
out to publicise it.

The police measures in the virtually
detribalised Indravelli village, as also
in the nearby _taluks_, on the day of
the firing are particularly interesting
in this context. The shops were ordered
that morning to be closed and the
weekly shandy on Monday was cancelled.
The bus stand was shifted a
little away from the village and nobody
was allowed to get down except
a handful of employees working in
the banks and government offices. All
the entry points into the village were
guarded by the police and those,
especially _Gonds_, entering the village
were beaten up. The fate of _Gonds_
coming to the shandy for their essential
purchases from nearby villages and
those coming to attend the meeting
was the same in the main junctions
and cross-country tracks.

While the police prevented the
_Gonds_ from entering the village and
even fired on them, they personally
escorted some non-tribal leaders of
the _Congress(I)_ led by a licensed
quack. He and his followers were allowed
to proceed towards Adilabad
town and instigate the non-tribal traders
and lower caste Hindus to come
and fight the _Gonds_ 'burning and
looting their houses in Indravelli'.

The actual sequence of events that
led to firing are even more shocking.
The Superintendent of Police (SP) asked the Revenue Divisional
Officer (RDO) --- who is the _ex-officio_ Executive
Magistrate --- to sign the firing orders
after issuing them himself, following
his futile attempts at pistol-point intimidation.
Even as the _Gonds_, bewildered
by the sudden cancellation of permission
for the meeting, were pleading
and insisting their right to go
ahead with their meeting,
the SP forced the RDO to order firing.
When they tried to run away in
panic and confusion, they were met
head on by an open police jeep emerging
from the local high school whose
armed police occupants fired at point-blank
range upon  the fleeing _Gonds_.
Rhe policemen hiding in the trees and
haystacks nearby also opened up their
trained guns to add to the toll.

# HOW MANY DIED?

How many persons were killed at
Indravelli on that day? The Home
Minister has stated that because identification
of the victims was not possible
since none of them were from
villages within a five-kilometre radius
of the firing spot. It is however widely
believed that more than 60 persons
were killed on the spot that day and
many of the dead bodies were burnt
secretly outside Adilabad town. Many
of the seriously injured were callously
piled upon each other in two vans
and taken to the Adilabad District
Hospital. When the vans reached their
destination, the hospital staff pulled
out 10 corpses from the vans; and
three more died later. Some hospital
sources complained of police high-handedness
in preventing proper documentation;
for only 13 were shown
as killed and nine injured while more
than twice that number had died in
the hospital itself. The number of injured
persons exceeds 65, if the hospital
records in the various towns of the
district are taken into account. In Utnoor
town itself about 30--40 dead
bodies were picked up on the roadside
by the fleeing _Gonds_ or left behind
for the police to tackle, according to
_Congress(I)_ and eyewitness sources.
This excludes those left dying in
ditches and rivulets and forests. To
this must be added the toll in the
Ichoda town (25) and Muthnoor village
(30). Taken together, this would mean
a toll of nearly 250. That many of the
wounded too will die is certain, for
not merely have the medical facilities
been inadequate, but many of the
injured have not availed even of these
inadequate facilities because of the
deep fear of the police. For the same
reason, the dependents of those killed
and injured have not claimed compensation;
in fact the _Gonds_ are refusing
to divulge the names of their
kith and kin or identify them, While
it is true that many of them could
not afford the transport costs to see
their dead or wounded, even the
entreaties of the friendly _Gond_ officials
drew a blank. They did not even cry
aloud for their dead and missing for
a week after the firing for fear of being
marked for police harassment. Even
known names of dead or missing persons
were sought to be explained away
by the _Gonds_. A senior official
working as Assistant Project Officer,
who sought to draw out the reticent
_Gonds_ (being one himself), carried 37
photographs of victims, thus incidentally
exposing the official claim of only
13 deaths.

Most of the jails in the district and
nearby ones are now filled with _Gonds_
arrested in the _taluks_ or in Indravelli,
including those who had come for the
weekly shandy. While most of the
10,000--15,000 who had gathered on
April 20 ran in all directions except
towards the Adilabad town (35  kms),
their whereabouts are still not known.
The fate of those _Gonds_ who had
come from the Chandrapur and Yeotmal
districts of Maharashtra is still
worse; they have no place to stay, and
they cannot go back in safety.

# _GOND_ RESISTANCE IN THE PAST

The history of _Gond_ resistance to
brutal exploitation in sporadic outbursts
is quite old. In 1940, at Babhajeri
village, they rose against the extortion
and exploitation of the officialdom
and the upper castes. After the
death of many in police firing in that
incident the Nizam government
appointed the eminent anthropologist
Haimedorf to study
the tribal problem.
Based on his recommendations
the 'Hyderabad Tribal Areas Dastur-Ul-Anar'
was passed. This bestowed
powers on the government to notify
tribal areas inhabited by _Gonds_, _Naikpods_,
_Kolams_ and _Pardhans_, all sub-castes
of _Gonds_. The 1949 'Hyderabad
Tribal Areas Regulation' provided for
administration of a notified tribal area
by an Agent; the notified area was
excluded from the jurisdiction of law
courts and revenue authority, Later
the District Collector was the Agent
till the system was abolished.

The peasant revolution of 1946--48 in
Telangana touched parts of Adilabad
district which included Kinwat and
Rajura _taluks_, the tribal belt. The direct
outcome of this was that some of
the then prevalent (it is not very different
now) direct forms of social exploitation
received a severe jolt and
some of them disappeared. Before 1974
only a handful of _CPI_ workers had organised
the peasantry on their own.
It was then that the Chandra Pulla
Reddy faction of the splintered _CPI(ML)_
stepped in and attempted to
organise the _Gonds_. These attempts
suffered a setback when Emergency
was declared; but with the lifting of
Emergency the movement got a boost
with the activity of _Radical Youth
League (RYL)_ and _Radical Students Union (RSU)_ of
"_People's War Group_", a wing of the
Kondapalli Sitaramayya faction of
_CPI(ML)_.

The story of the movement is interesting,
woven as it is around the
legendary "_Porkala Dora_" (Lord of the
Bushes), Dasari Lakshmikantam (a former
trade unionist tow belonging to
the Kondapalli Sitaramayya faction)
who entered the scene in 1972. He
began to befriend the _Gonds_ by working
as a tobacco seller on bike and
on foot, earning for himself the name
of _Pogaku Atchaiah_ (Tobacco Giver/Seller).

A major development came in September
1978 when three notorious
Telugu _Komtis_ (Traders) in Kamana
Wankidi, Asifabad _taluk_, bordering
Chandrapur district of Maharashtra,
were given an ultimatum by the _CPI(ML)_
activists to end their practice of
keeping the _Gonds_ in perennial debt.
These moneylenders were overwriting
the actual loan many times, charging
100 per cent interest and tampering
with records of repayments. When
_Porkala Dora_ was told about this exploitation
he gathered 500 _Gonds_, raided
their houses and burnt the promissory
notes. The police reacted promptly
by setting up a camp for a week and
launched a case. (It may be noted that
the police had done a similar thing
in the last month of 1976 in Lingapur
village of Laxettipet _taluk_, after the
murder of a landlord's family and
henchmen. Despite the evidence and
statements by the aggrieved that none
of the villagers in the _taluk_ was involved,
more than 1,000 persons, their
are, sex and condition notwithstanding,
were tortured in turns for three
months.) It was then that _Porkala Dora_
went underground, and by remaining
active while underground, he became
more popular among the _Gonds_.

# ORGANISING THE _GONDS_

The _RYL_ and _RSU_ have been working
in this district since 1973, but
they became more active in 1977 when
_RYL_ began its 'Go to the Villages'
campaign and formed the _Girijan Rythu
Coolie Sangham_ (Tribal Farm Labour
Society). Since its attempts at organising
coalmine workers (one recalls the
notorious Rajeswari rape case as well
as the hanging of a coalminer's wife
by the mine manager's son and his gang)
as well as those in textile and paper
industries had been ruthlessly suppressed
by the police, the "go to the villages"
campaign was a secret affair.
Peddi Shankar who was murdered in
a so-called 'encounter" in Chandrapur
district of Maharashtra in December
1980 was a product of this campaign.

Even prior to the efforts of the _Girijan
Rythu Coolie Sangham_, the _Gonds_
were organised into small sanghams
covering four or five villages each.
When a _Gond_ was wronged, the Tudum
or Nagara drums were to be
beaten as a signal to the rest of the
_Gonds_ in the vicinity at which they
would all collect in that village. The
matter would be debated and the course
of action decided. The _Gonds_ were
advised by _Porkala Dora_ to cultivate
patches of forest land from which they
had been evicted. They were advised
only to attempt to regain and cultivate
lands snatched away under the pretext
of enforcing the 1964 Act --- though
their lands were being cultivated prior
to it --- and not fell new trees in
forest reserves for cultivation. This
latter point has been the major accusation
in official propaganda against 'extremists'.
The Adivasi Sanghams were
also told to fight the officials if they
opposed them in their attempt to regain
lost land.

The April 20 meeting at Indravelli
was called by the _Girijan Rythu Coolie
Sangham_ as a first step in its agitational
programme (not armed struggle and
lightning attacks, as government and
the press make it out to be). It was
intended to help _Gonds_ secure their
lands snatched by the rich non-tribals
(including _Lambadas_) and government
officials. According to some official
sources dealing with the land disputes
involving the _Gonds_, more than one-third
of their land is in the possession
of _non-Gonds_, and the land ceiling
law notwithstanding, large landholdings
of 2,000 to 6,000 acres continue
to exist in Adilabad.

# ALL-ROUND EXPLOITATION

_Gonds_ are also exploited by the
prosperous moneylenders from Gujarat,
Telangana, Maharashtra and other
places. The large scale immigration of
non-tribals into Adilabad started with
the improvement of communication
links especially the Gudihatnur-Utnoor-Kerimeri-Asifabad
road link. This has
changed the population ratios in favour
of non-tribals, a fact noted by
the pioneering study of _Gonds_ by
Christoph von Furer-Haimendorf who
has also detailed the exploitation ot
_Gonds_ by non-tribals and _Lambadas_.
The _Lambadas_, who were declared
scheduled castes in December 1976
continue to be classified as a 'Backward
Class' in their ancestral Maharashtra
and do not anyway consider
themselves STs except for grabbing the
benefits, depriving the _Gonds_ of their
due share. Their political leaders have
even deprived _Gonds_ of representation
in the Assembly, thanks to the former
Minister Narsa Reddi's skillful re-delineation
of the constituencies: The Lambada
MLA T Amar Singh, who has
prospered well after his elevation from
his clerical post in the _Girijan corporation_
thanks to _arrack_ contracts, is
openly hostile to the _Gonds_.

For _Gonds_, the forest department,
survey and settlements department, revenue
and co-operative department,
along with the so-called 'development'
agencies and the police all spell trouble.
A confidential file in the district
collectorate notes that the _Patwaris_,
though fully aware of the deliberate
survey errors, have not guided the
_Gonds_ about procedures to set them
right. Most of the _Gonds_ are unaware
of _pattas_ supposedly being assigned to
them, since they are not even shown
the lands. The Forest Settlement Officer
is stationed in Nizamabad district and
none of the _Gonds_ can afford to go
there to settle the land disputes created
by forest officials using the 1964
Act. The file also criticises the _Girijan
Corporation_ which fleeces the _Gonds_
as much as any other private trading
agency and the lengthy procedures of
the Adilabad Jilla Kendra Sahakara
Bank. In more than a dozen villages
visited by this correspondent there
was little evidence of the lakhs of
rupees spent on 'development' programmes
for tribal uplift.

While government has made a lot
of noise about 'extremist' activities
among the _Gonds_, it is calculatedly
indifferent to the _dacoit gangs_ operating
in the reserve forest areas. The
method adopted by the police to curb
this menace is truly astonishing; according
to the police, the _dacoits_ are
'_naxalites_' (surprisingly there are no
encounters with them) and the _dacoits_
victimise only _non-Gonds_. This is patently
false for the _Gonds_ are a particular
object of attack by these _dacoits_
as is evidenced by their attack on two
_Gond_ women in Jagnapur village near
Mallayala, Boath _taluk_, in the reserve
forests. The _dacoit gang_ which started
its operations in March this year has
become a terror and the poor tribals
and non-tribals are not able to enter
the forests for collecting _Tuniki Aaku_
(_beedi_ leaves). Even the forest officials
are afraid of entering the forests
though they have been given permission
to go without uniforms.

# THE FUTURE

The Indravelli massacre was not an
isolated attack on _Gonds_; the attacks
have been picked up by other policemen
in the state. The situation is becoming
explosive with the _Gonds_
deciding to arm themselves for future
meetings. The _nagara drums_ can reach
tribals in Maharashtra, MP and the
Jharkhand. If the attitude of the government
to similar problems in the
northeast as well as restive rural poor
and their organisers especially in
Andhra Pradesh is any indicator, we
can expect larger massacres. Indravelli
carnage was after all carried out by
a mere Superintendent of Police, albeit
very well-connected, without the political
backing in advance or directives
from the Director General of Police,
who is the greatest engineer of 'encounters'
and has been honoured by
the highest authority in the land. This
autonomy in police administration in
massacres is going to get stronger
which means that the future tolls may
be even larger.
