# Hours of Labor[^4/1]


[^4/1]: An address delivered at the first Annual meeting of the _Civic Federation of New England_, January, 11, 1906.

_Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen_:---

Whether in a particular business at a particular time the hours of labor
should be materially shortened presents usually a grave question. Such a
change, owing to competition, direct or indirect, may seriously threaten
the prosperity or even the life of the business; or the demand for the
reduction of hours may be coupled with other terms or conditions clearly
inadmissible. In such cases strenuous resistance becomes the duty of the
employer. But, however commendable the resistance of the employer to a
reduction of hours may be in a particular case, we should all recognize
that a short working day is in general essential to the attainment of
American economic, social and political ideals, and our efforts should
be directed to that end.

Mr. Gompers quoted some time ago the saying of Heine that \"Bread is
Freedom.\" The ancient Greeks, recognizing that \"Man can not live by
bread alone,\" declared that \"Leisure is Freedom.\" Undoubtedly \"A
full dinner pail\" is a great achievement as compared with an empty one,
but no people ever did or ever can attain a worthy civilization by the
satisfaction merely of material needs, however high these needs are
raised. The American standard of living demands not only a high minimum
wage, but a high minimum of leisure, because we must meet also needs
other than material ones.

The welfare of our country demands that leisure be provided for. This is
not a plea for indolence. Leisure does not imply idleness. The provision
for leisure does not contemplate working less hard. It means ability to
work not less, but more --- ability to work at something besides
bread-winning --- ability to work harder while working at bread-winning,
and ability to work more years at bread winning. We need leisure, among
other reasons, because with us every man is of the ruling class. Our
education and condition of life must be such as become a ruler. Our
great beneficent experiment in democracy will fail unless the people,
our rulers, are developed in character and intelligence.

Now consider what, particularly in our large cities, the chance for such
development is for men and women who are required regularly to work ten
or even nine hours a day. A nine-hour work-day means, including the noon
hour, ten hours at the factory or workshop. That means in Boston for
most of those who live in the suburbs eleven or twelve hours devoted to
the workshop and getting to and from it. When you add the time
necessarily spent at breakfast and supper, dressing and undressing,
house work, shopping and sleep, you find that at least twenty-one of the
twenty-four hours are devoted to *subsistence* and a small fraction of
the day is left for *living*, even if after the long work day one is in
a condition mentally and physically to really live.

To attain proper development of character, mind and body, a short
working day is essential, and the eight-hour day is in most occupations
and for most people not too short. For the exceptional occupation and
for the exceptional man in any occupation, no general rule is required;
and right thinking on this subject cannot be aided by reference to such
exceptional instances. Most professions, many positions in business, and
some in trades fall within the class of excepted occupations. Good work
in such occupations almost necessarily brings with it joy, because it
implies development of faculties and, ordinarily, pecuniary advancement.
In every occupation there are such possibilities for the exceptional
man. But in most industrial occupations --- in the unskilled trades and in
many so-called skilled trades --- the limits of development and of
financial success for any individual are soon reached, and consequently
there is little joy in such work except as compared with the hours of
idleness, or such satisfaction as comes to the needy in securing the
means of subsistence.

And what is necessary to _living_ as distinguished from _subsisting_?

In the first place, bodily health is necessary; that is, not merely
freedom from illness, but continued physical ability to work hard. For
those engaged in the more favored occupations, like the professions, and
the higher positions in business and some trades, such health, including
the postponement of old age, has been measurably attained by better
conditions of living, and notably by outdoor recreation. What has been
found necessary for continued health and working capacity for those
engaged in these favored occupations we should seek to make attainable
for all our citizens. The burden and waste to the community and to the
individual, and the suffering attendant upon sickness and premature
superannuation, may be and should be lessened by a shortening of the
hours of labor so as to permit of proper out-door recreation.

In the second place, mental development is necessary. Massachusetts,
recognizing the education of her citizens to be an essential condition
of a free and prosperous people, has made compulsory the schooling of
her children to the age of fourteen, has prohibited their working in
manufacturing or mercantile establishments under the age of fourteen,
and has withheld the right to vote from illiterate adults as inexorably
as from idiots. But the intellectual development of citizens may not be
allowed to end at fourteen. With most people whose minds have really
developed, the age of fourteen is rather the beginning than the end of
the educational period. The educational standard required of a democracy
is obviously high. The citizen should be able to comprehend among other
things the many great and difficult problems of industry, commerce and
finance, which with us necessarily become political questions. He must
learn about men as well as things.

In this way only can the Commonwealth be saved from the pitfalls of
financial schemers on the one hand or of ambitious demagogues on the
other. Â But for the attainment of such an education, such mental
development, it is essential that the education shall be continuous
throughout life; and an essential condition of such continuous education
is free time, that is, leisure --- and leisure does not imply merely a time
for rest, but free time when body and mind are sufficiently fresh to
permit of mental effort. There is full justification for the common
practice in trades of charging at the rate of 50% additional
for work in excess of the regular hours. Indeed, I doubt whether that
rate of pay is not often grossly inadequate to compensate for what it
takes out of the employee. An extra hour of labor may render useless
those other hours which might have been devoted to development, or to
the performance of other duties, or to pleasure. The excess load is
wasteful with man as well as with horses or vehicles or machinery.
Whether the needed education of the citizens is to be given in classes
or from the political platform, in the discussion of the lodges or in
the trades unions, or is to be gained from the reading of papers,
periodicals, or books, freshness of mind is imperative; and to the
preservation of freshness of mind a short work day is for most people
essential.

Bodily and mental health and development will furthermore tend to
promote innocent, rational pleasures and, in general, better habits of
living. Such conditions will tend to lessen the great curse of drink,
and with it some of the greatest burdens of the individual and of
society.

It is, of course, no answer to the plea for a shorter work day to say
that the leisure resulting from shorter hours may not be profitably
employed. The art of using leisure time, like any other, must be
learned; but it is certain that the proper use of leisure, as of
liberty, can never be attained except by those who have the opportunity
of leisure or of liberty.

Nor is it an answer to the plea for a shorter work day to say that most
workingmen secure a certain amount of free time through the irregularity
of their work. Such free time is literally time lost. Such irregular
excessive free time presents an even greater evil than that of excessive
work.

Although the reduction of the hours of labor is clearly desirable, it
may, as already stated, be impossible, on account of competition or
other cause, to grant the reduction at a particular time in a particular
business. But in my opinion employers are apt to exaggerate the
resulting loss of earnings, at least in the long run. Greater freshness,
better health and mental development that go with shorter hours may be
relied upon within reasonable limits to make up, in many businesses at
least, in part, for a shortening of working time, where the employer
receives, as he should, the full co-operation of the employees to secure
the largest possible production.

Obviously no limitation should be imposed upon the output of the
individual, nor any rule be insisted upon by the employees which would
hamper the most efficient use of machinery. Such arbitrary restrictions
are wasteful and uneconomic at all times, and necessarily act as a brake
on the movement towards shorter hours. The natural gain in vigor and
working efficiency on the part of the employee should be allowed to show
itself in the shop results. If this gain in potential efficiency is
nullified by artificial limitations on what and how much a man shall do,
with the facilities placed at his disposal, the decrease in working time
must inevitably mean increased cost, without either economic or moral
justification, and under such circumstances the employer has no other
course open to him than that of resistance to any attempt to reduce the
working time.

If in any case we should find that, despite the fullest co-operation of
employees, the reduced working time results in immediate economic loss,
the welfare of our democratic community compels us to work nevertheless
for a reasonably short work day as a condition essential to the making
of good citizens.
