# OUR NEW PEONAGE: DISCRETIONARY PENSIONS[^8/1]


[^8/1]: The substance of a discussion before the Stanley Committee, January, 1912; published in *The Independent*, July 25, 1912.

Half a century ago nearly every American boy could look forward to
becoming independent as a farmer or mechanic, in business or in
professional life; and nearly every American girl might expect to become
the wife of such a man. To-day most American boys have reason to
believe, that throughout life they will work in some capacity as
employees of others, either in private or public business; and a large
percentage of the women occupy like positions. This revolutionary change
has resulted from the great growth of manufacturing and mining as
compared with farming; from the formation of trusts and other large
business concerns; from the development of our transportation and other
public utility corporations; from the marked increase in governmental
functions; and, finally, from the invasion of women into industry.

As soon as we awakened to the fact that America had become largely a
nation of employees, the need of a comprehensive provision for
superannuated wage-earners secured attention. Given the status of
employee for life, and the need of an old age pension[^8/2] is obvious. The employee needs the pension because he
cannot --- or at least does not --- provide adequately from his wages for
the period of superannuation. The employers need a comprehensive pension
system because, while the presence of the superannuated employees in a
business seriously impairs its efficiency, the dictates both of humanity
and of policy prevent discharge unless their financial necessities are
provided for. The demand for a pension system grows more pressing as
businesses grow more stable; for in older businesses there is a constant
tendency to accumulate superannuated employees. The demand becomes
particularly acute when businesses grow large as well as old; for then
it becomes difficult to provide for the individual needs of the abnormal
employee.

[^8/2]: The term "pension" is used throughout in its popular sense as including old age annuities.

As stated by the Massachusetts Commission on Old Age Pensions (January,
1910):

>The problem of dealing with the aged employee is an urgent one in the
modern business world. The use of machinery and the stress of industrial
employment have made it increasingly difficult for aged employees to
hold the pace. The universal demand nowadays is for young men. Many
concerns refuse to take on inexperienced men over thirty-five years of
age. Moreover, men wear out faster under the increased strain. What to
do with the worn-out workers, --- that is the essence of the pension
problem. To carry them on the pay roll at their regular employment means
waste and disorganization of the working force; to turn them adrift is
not humane. In the past, large employers of labor have tried to meet
this difficulty in piecemeal fashion, by retiring aged employees on
pensions in certain cases, or giving them light work, each case being
provided for separately, on its own merits; now they are beginning to
deal with the problem in a systematic fashion, by adopting a uniform
method of retirement with pension. ... The motives that have induced large corporate employers to provide
retirement pensions are partly economic and partly humanitarian or
philanthropic. Economic motives play the leading part. This thing has
been done because it has been found to be good business policy. The
economic gain from the pension system is twofold; it eliminates the
waste and demoralization attendant upon the continued employment of old
men who have outlived their usefulness; and it helps to promote
industry, contentment and loyalty on the part of the working force.

Economically, the superannuation provision may be considered as a
depreciation charge. Every prudent manufacturer makes an annual charge
for the depreciation of his machines, recognizing not merely physical
depreciation, but lessened value through obsolescence. He looks forward
to the time when the machine, though still in existence and in perfect
repair, will be unprofitable, and hence must be abandoned. This annual
charge for depreciation he treats as a necessary expense of the
business.

From the point of view of the workingman the expense of providing old
age pensions is a part of the daily cost of living. He should contribute
while able to work to a fund which will sustain him when he ceases to
earn. From the point of view of the employer, the expense of providing
old age pensions is a part of the current expense of his business. He
should pay as he goes the accruing cost of retiring employees who will
become superannuated. If the wage is insufficient to enable the
workingman to provide himself with a pension, it is not a living wage.
So far as the cost of the old age pension is paid by the employer for
the employees\' benefit, it is in substance a part of the wage. So far
as such a payment by the employer is for insurance against that waste
and inefficiency in his establishment which would result from retaining
superannuated employees, and for protection against that discontent
which would result from discharging the superannuated without providing
for them financially, it is a part of the business expense. Since the
cost of making old age provision is thus either a part of the
employees\' daily cost of living or of the employer\'s daily business
expense, it should be treated as a current expense, and may be likened
to the premium for fire or accident insurance. Whether in the adjustment
of relations between the employer and the employee this current cost of
providing old age pensions should be borne wholly by the employer, or
wholly by the employee, or jointly by both, is an open question; but
European and American experience makes it dear that under our present
industrial system some comprehensive financial provision for the
superannuated worker is essential to social if not to industrial
solvency. To neglect such a requirement is as dangerous as it is for the
manufacturer to ignore the depreciation of his machines.

For the protection of the wage-earner it is obviously necessary that the
right to a pension shall not depend upon his being in the employ of a
particular concern. If his right to an annuity is dependent upon his
remaining in a particular employ he loses all protection whenever he
ceases to be so employed, whether he leaves voluntarily, or is
discharged, or in case the concern discontinues business by failure or
for other cause.

Adequate old age protection, therefore, cannot be secured to the
wage-earner through the promise of a pension from a particular concern.
He should have old age insurance which will protect the wage-earner in
whosesoever employ he may happen to be when he reaches the period of
superannuation. For the protection of the wage-earner it is likewise
necessary that the pension system should confer an absolute right. No
pension system can be satisfactory which makes the granting --- or the
continuance of a pension after it has been granted --- a matter of
discretion.

Germany, France, England and other European countries have undertaken to
secure through government action old age pensions for those who work in
private businesses. The system adopted in each of these countries
differs in some respects from that prevailing in each of the others; but
each system embodies the essential requirements referred to above;
namely, *the pension is not dependent upon the workingman remaining in
any particular employ, nor is it dependent upon the discretion of any
individuals.*

In America the providing of old age pensions for wage-earners in private
businesses is left wholly to private initiative. Many large
concerns --- railroads, public utilities, industrial and financial
concerns --- have established their own pension systems. Under
substantially all of these systems the wage-earner receives no
protection unless he remains in the company\'s employ until the age of
retirement is reached, and even in that event the original grant and the
continuance of the pension are, in large measure, discretionary.

Thus, the pension plan of the United States Steel Corporation, which
took effect January 1, 1911, provides pensions only for those who have
been in the employ of the company at least twenty years, and remain
until the time for retirement; *but no one has the right to remain in
the employ:*

>Article 26. \"Neither the creation of this fund nor any other action at
any time taken by any corporation included under the provisions of the
fund, or by the board of trustees, shall give to any employee the right
to be retained in the service, and all employees remain subject to
discharge to the same extent as if this pension fund had never been
created.\"

Even if the worker has remained in the employ until the time fixed for
retirement, and has served faithfully, he has no *right* to a pension:

>Article 24. \"The pension plan is a purely voluntary provision for the
benefit of employees superannuated or totally incapacitated after long
and faithful service and constitutes no contract and confers no legal
rights upon any employee.\"

And a board of trustees, in whose selection the workers have no voice,
and on which they have no representation, may refuse to grant them a
pension or may terminate it after it has been granted, for what they in
their discretion deem adequate cause:

>Article 22. \"Pensions may be withheld or terminated in case of
misconduct on the part of the beneficiaries or for other cause
sufficient in the judgment of the board of trustees to warrant such
action.\"

The pension plan of most other corporations embodies similar provisions.
Thus, the pension plan of the International Harvester Company provides:

>Article 14. \"Neither the establishment of this system nor the granting
of a pension nor any other action now or hereafter taken by the pension
board or by the officers of the company shall be held or construed as
creating a contract or giving to any officer, agent or employee the
right to be retained in the service, or any right to any pension
allowance, and the company expressly reserves unaffected hereby, its
right to discharge without liability, other than for salary or wages due
and unpaid, any employee, whenever the interests of the company may, in
its judgment, so require.\"

It has often been said by the corporations that one of their purposes in
establishing a pension system is to \"develop loyalty.\" But provisions
like those quoted above suggest a purpose rather to *compel* than to
*develop* \"loyalty.\" The system is in effect a form of *strike
insurance*. The pension is made dependent upon continuity of employment
for a fixed period. The worker cannot receive a pension unless he
remains in the company\'s employ until the date for retirement, and he
has no right to remain in its employ, since the company reserves the
full power to discharge him at any time, with or without cause. After a
wage-earner has served a number of years and feels himself growing
older, the prospect of a pension becomes a potent influence. He realizes
that if he abandons his position or is discharged, he loses not only
immediate employment, but protection for old age. He realizes also that
the chance of securing other employment is greatly diminished by reason
of his advancing years; diminished not because he is already old and
less efficient, but because he will become superannuated sooner than a
younger man, so that his employment by another concern will impose upon
it or its pension system a superannuation burden sooner than if a
younger man were selected.

Features in a pension system like those quoted above tend to make the
wage-earner compliant. He can be more readily relied upon to prove
\"loyal\" and not to \"go out\" even if others strike for higher wages
and better working conditions. The \"continuous employment feature\" of
the pension system tends thus to rivet the wage-earner to his employer,
and the provision by which the allowance of a pension is made
discretionary further insures \"loyalty\" of the wage-earner during his
employment. An employee of the United States Steel Corporation advancing
in years might well be deterred from hazarding the prospect of a pension
by trade-union activity, or even by joining a union.

The tendency of such provisions in a pension system to destroy
industrial liberty is the more potent because the system is being
adopted quite generally by those trusts and other powerful corporations
which are determined to eliminate trade-unionism. Indeed, in many cases
the pension system was introduced as an aid to carrying out that labor
policy. Individual employees, working under conditions which preclude
collective bargaining, obviously lack industrial liberty so long as they
are so employed; for they have no part in determining the conditions
under which they work. After entering such employment, the only remnant
of liberty remaining to them is the liberty of leaving it; and the
features of the pension system just referred to undermine that remnant
of liberty.

A pension system with such features must either prove a delusive
protection or operate as a bribe to induce the wage-earner to submit to
a new form of subjection to the corporation. A frank employer recently
said: \"By providing so liberal a pension we have bought from the
employee the right to leave us.\" Such a use of the pension is obviously
illegitimate. The legitimate need of the employer for a pension system
is satisfied if the provisions protect him from the necessity of keeping
superannuated employees on the pay roll. This need of the employer is
equally satisfied whether the employee retires on a pension or leaves
the employ before the age of retirement. In other words, what the
employer should seek to accomplish by the pension is merely to protect
his business from the incubus of superannuated employees; and this
purpose is accomplished as to each employee if he leaves the employ
before he becomes superannuated. If the workingman so leaves, he should
in some form carry with him the accrued right to a pension --- the
proportionate value of the time service --- which would ripen into a
pension if the workingman or his new employer paid the premiums of later
years. Under these private pension systems that part of the pension
earned by years of service is wholly lost when he leaves the company\'s
employ, whatever the cause.

Employers seek to justify provisions in the pension systems like those
quoted above by the fact that the pension fund is contributed wholly by
the employer. But this fact furnishes no justification. The employer
should not be permitted, even at his own expense, to establish a pension
system which tends to rob the workingman of his little remaining
industrial liberty. A practice bearing such fruits is clearly against
public policy. Many of our States have, in aid of industrial liberty,
prohibited the employers from making it a condition of employment that
their employees should agree not to join a labor union. It may become
necessary to apply a similar prohibition against features in private
pension schemes which have a tendency to unduly abridge the liberty of
the individual workingman.

The Massachusetts savings insurance banks, and several of the life
insurance companies, afford employers facilities for establishing
pension systems which are free from the objections discussed above. From
such insurance concerns there can be purchased for each employee an old
age annuity which (subject to due premium payments) confers upon the
holder an absolute right to the annuity, and which is equally effective
in whosesoever employ the annuitant is, or if he be without an employer.

The premiums on such an annuity policy could be made payable at frequent
intervals, say monthly, so that if payable by the employee they would
not be too large to be borne, and if payable by the employer, they may
be figured as a part of the current wage or expense. The policy should
preferably be taken out while the wage-earner is young, so that the
current premium may be small; for the annual cost of old age insurance,
like that of life insurance, becomes almost prohibitive when the policy
is not taken out until the insured is advanced in years. If the policy
is not taken out until the wage-earner grows old, the premium will be so
large that, if payable by the wage-earner, it could not be borne, and if
payable by the employer, might discourage the annuitant\'s being
employed. Under the Massachusetts system a separate annuity policy is
issued for each employee, so that the employee can take the policy with
him when he leaves a concern. The employee can then pay the premiums
himself until another employer is found who is willing to assume the
charge as a part of his own system of providing against superannuation.
The workingman possessing such an annuity policy taken out when young
should meet with no difficulty in securing employment solely on account
of advancing years; for the burden on the new employer of providing
against his superannuation would be no greater than in the case of a
younger employee.

Every pension system should be contributory and co-operative; that is,
the cost should be borne partly by the employer and partly by the
employee, and preferably in equal shares. The management of the pension
system should likewise be shared in by both employer and employee. The
system should also be obligatory; that is, when a system has been
established, all employees should, so far as possible, become subject to
its provisions; and both employer and employee should be bound to
continue the system once established. For the present, however, it
should be optional with the employer and his employees to establish a
pension system.

The Boston and Maine Pension Act[^8/3], passed by the Massachusetts
Legislature in 1909 contains suggestions for such an elective obligatory
co-operative system. That act provides, among other
things:

[^8/3]: The act, which embodies the results of long
negotiations between the company and the employees, was enacted May 29, 1909.
On June 18, 1909, the Legislature of Massachusetts authorized the
New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Company to acquire control of
the Boston and Maine system. The New Haven management being opposed to
the establishment of the pension plan, the Boston and Maine pension
system has not yet become operative.

*First*. A pension system is established only in case the company by a
majority vote of its directors and a two-thirds vote of the employees
voting thereon decide so to do. When adopted by such votes the system
becomes operative with the force of law upon all persons then or
thereafter employed, except such as voted against establishing the
system, and also within three months thereafter filed their written
objections thereto.

*Second*. The pension fund is supplied by monthly contributions from
employer and employees in equal shares, the employees\' share being
deducted from wages and transmitted by the company to the pension fund.

*Third*. The management of the pension system is vested in a board of
seven trustees, three of whom are selected by the company, three by the
employees (who are formed into a pension association), and the seventh
by the six so chosen.

*Fourth*. The amount of contributions to the pension fund is fixed as a
percentage of wages. What percentage shall be assessed is determined by
the trustees (subject to the approval of the directors of the company)
up to an amount equal to three % of the wages, and can be fixed
at a higher amount if approved by the directors and the pension
association.

*Fifth*. Any one who remains in the employ of the company up to the time
of retirement has an absolute right to a pension. Any person who ceases
to be an employee prior to the time fixed for retirement retains the
right to a part only of the accrued pension; that is, a person who
leaves the employ voluntarily, or who is discharged, receives not the
full accrued value of the pension at the time of so leaving, but only an
amount equal to his own contributions. The act embodies in this respect
a very objectionable feature, which was reluctantly assented to by the
committee of the employees, as necessary to secure the consent of the
company to the support of the bill, and in the hope that a more just
provision might be later substituted.

It is upon these general lines, consistent with individual liberty and
industrial democracy, that the American pension systems should be
developed.
