# THE INCORPORATION OF TRADES UNIONS[^9/1]


[^9/1]: An address delivered at a meeting of the Economic Club of Boston, December 4, 1902, and published in the *Green Bag*, January, 1903.

Lest what I say on the advisability of incorporating trade unions be
misunderstood, it seems wise to state at the outset my views of their
value to the community.

They have been largely instrumental in securing reasonable hours of
labor and proper conditions of work; in raising materially the scale of
wages, and in protecting women and children from industrial oppression.

The trade unions have done this, not for the workingmen alone, but for
all of us; since the conditions under which so large a part of our
fellow citizens work and live will determine, in great measure, the
future of our country for good or for evil.

This improvement in the condition of the workingmen has been almost a
net profit to the community. Here and there individuals have been
sacrificed to the movement; but the instances have been comparatively
few, and the gain to the employees has not been attended by a
corresponding loss to the employer. In many instances, the employer\'s
interests have been directly advanced as an incident to improving the
conditions of labor; and perhaps in no respect more than in that
expressed by a very wise and able railroad president in a neighboring
State, who said: \"I need the labor-union to protect me from my own
arbitrariness.\"

It is true that the struggle to attain these great ends has often been
attended by intolerable acts of violence, intimidation and oppression;
but the spirit which underlies the labor movement has been essentially
noble. The spirit which subordinates the interests of the individual to
that of the class is the spirit of brotherhood --- a near approach to
altruism; it reaches pure altruism when it involves a sacrifice of
present interests for the welfare of others in the distant future.

Modern civilization affords no instance of enlightened self-sacrifice on
so large a scale as that presented when great bodies of men calmly and
voluntarily give up steady work, at satisfactory wages and under proper
conditions, for the sole reason that the employer refuses the
recognition of their union, which they believe to be essential to the
ultimate good of the workingmen. If you search for the heroes of peace,
you will find many of them among those obscure and humble workmen who
have braved idleness and poverty in devotion to the principle for which
their union stands.

And because the trade unions have accomplished much, and because their
fundamental principle is noble, it is our duty, where the unions
misconduct themselves, not to attack the unions, not --- ostrich-like --- to
refuse to recognize them, but to attack the abuses to which the unions,
in common with other human institutions, are subject, and with which
they are afflicted; to remember that a bad act is no worse, as it is no
better, because it has been done by a labor union and not by a
partnership or a business corporation. If unions are lawless, restrain
and punish their lawlessness; if they are arbitrary, repress their
arbitrariness; if their demands are unreasonable or unjust, resist them;
but do not oppose the unions as such.

Now, the best friends of labor unions must and should admit that their
action is frequently hasty and ill-considered, the result of emotion
rather than of reason; that their action is frequently arbitrary, the
natural result of the possession of great power by persons not
accustomed to its use; and that the unions frequently ignore laws which
seem to hamper them in their efforts, and which they therefore regard as
unjust. For these defects, being but human, no complete remedy can be
found; but the incorporation of labor unions would, among other things,
tend in some measure to correct them.

The general experience in this country, in respect at least to the great
strikes, has been that success or failure depended mainly upon whether
public opinion was with or against the strikers. Nearly every American
who is not prejudiced by his own peculiar interests recognizes the value
of labor unions. Nearly every American who is not himself financially
interested in a particular controversy sympathizes thoroughly with every
struggle of the workingmen to better their own condition. But this
sympathy for the workingmen is quickly forfeited whenever the conduct of
the strikers is unreasonable, arbitrary, lawless or unjust. The American
people with their common sense, their desire for fair play and their
respect for law, resent such conduct. The growth and success of labor
unions, therefore, as well as their usefulness to the community at
large, would be much advanced by any measures which tend to make them
more deliberate, less arbitrary, and more patient with the trammels of a
civilized community. They need, like the wise railroad president to whom
I referred, something to protect them from their own arbitrariness. The
employer and the community also require this protection. Incorporation
would in some measure help to this end.

When, in the course of a strike, illegal acts are committed, such as
acts of violence or of undue oppression, the individual committing the
wrong is, of course, legally liable. If the act is a crime, the
perpetrator may be arrested and punished; if it is a mere trespass, he
may be made to pay damages, provided he is financially responsible; and
if money damages appear not to be an adequate remedy, an injunction
against the wrongful acts may be granted by a court of equity. If the
injunction is disobeyed, the defendant may be imprisoned for contempt.

Now, it seems to be a common belief in this country that while the
individual may be thus proceeded against in any of these ways, the labor
union, as such, being unincorporated, that is, being a mere voluntary
association, cannot be made legally responsible for its acts. The rules
of law established by the courts of this country afford, it is true, no
justification for this opinion. A union, although a voluntary
unincorporated association, is legally responsible for its acts in much
the same way that an individual, a partnership or a corporation is
responsible. If a union, through its constituted agents, commits a
wrong, or is guilty of violence or of illegal oppression, the union, and
not merely the individuals who are the direct instruments of the wrong,
can be enjoined or made liable for damages to the same extent that the
union could be if it were incorporated; and the funds belonging to the
unincorporated union can be reached to satisfy any damages which might
be recovered for the wrong done. The Taff Vale Railway case, decided
last year in England, in which it was held that the Amalgamated Society
of Railway Servants could, as a union, be enjoined and be made liable in
damages for wrongs perpetrated in the course of a strike, created
consternation among labor unions there, but it laid down no principle of
law new to this country.

Numerous instances may be found in our courts where labor unions have
been enjoined, and in our own State, more than thirty years ago, an
action was maintained against a union for wrongfully extorting from an
employer a penalty for having used the product of \"scab\" labor. But
while the rules of legal liability apply fully to the unions, though
unincorporated, it is, as a practical matter, more difficult for the
plaintiff to conduct the litigation, and it is particularly difficult to
reach the funds of the union with which to satisfy any judgment that may
be recovered. There has consequently arisen, not a legal, but a
practical immunity of the unions, as such, for most wrongs committed.

This practical immunity of the unions from legal liability is deemed by
many labor leaders a great advantage. To me it appears to be just the
reverse. It tends to make officers and members reckless and lawless, and
thereby to alienate public sympathy and bring failure upon their
efforts. It creates on the part of the employers, also, a bitter
antagonism, not so much on account of lawless acts as from a deep-rooted
sense of injustice, arising from the feeling that while the employer is
subject to law, the union holds a position of legal irresponsibility.

This practical immunity of the labor unions from suit or legal liability
is probably largely responsible for the existence of the greatest
grievances which labor unions consider they have suffered at the hands
of the courts; that is, the so-called \"government by injunction.\" It
has come about in this way: An act believed to be illegal is committed
during a strike. If that act is a crime, a man may be arrested, but in
no case can he be convicted of a crime except on proof beyond a
reasonable doubt and a verdict of the jury, and on every jury there is
apt to be some one favorable to the defendant. Many acts, however, may
be illegal which are not criminal, and for these the only remedy at law
is a civil action for damages; but as the defendant is usually
financially irresponsible, such action would afford no remedy.

The courts, therefore, finding acts committed or threatened, for which
the guilty parties cannot be punished as for a crime, and cannot be made
to pay damages by way of compensation, have been induced to apply
freely, perhaps too freely, the _writ of injunction_. They have granted,
in many instances, this writ according to the practices of the court of
equity upon preliminary application, wholly *_ex parte_*, and upon
affidavits, without any chance of cross-examination. If the courts had
been dealing with a responsible union instead of with irresponsible
defendants, they would, doubtless in many of the cases, have refused to
interfere by injunction and have resolved any doubts in favor of the
defendants instead of the plaintiffs.

In another respect, also, this practical immunity of the unions has been
very dearly bought: Nearly every large strike is attended by acts of
flagrant lawlessness. The employers, and a large part of the public,
charge these acts to the unions. In very many instances the unions are
entirely innocent. Hoodlums, or habitual criminals, have merely availed
themselves of a convenient opportunity for breaking the law, in some
instances even incited thereto by employers desiring to turn public
opinion against the strikers. What an immense gain would come to the
unions from a full and fair trial of such charges if the innocence of
the unions were established, and perhaps even the guilt of an employer!
And such a trial would almost necessarily be had before a jury, upon
oral testimony, with full opportunity of cross-examination; whereas now,
nearly every important adjudication involving the alleged action of
unions is made upon application to a judge sitting alone, and upon
written affidavits, without the opportunity of cross-examination.

It has been objected by some of the labor leaders that incorporation of
the unions would expose to loss the funds which have been collected as
insurance against sickness, accident and enforced idleness; that these
funds might be reached to satisfy claims made for wrongs alleged to have
been committed by the union. I can conceive of no expenditure of money
by a union which could bring so large a return as the payment of
compensation for some wrong actually committed by it. Any such payment
would go far in curbing the officers and members of the union from
future transgression of the law, and it would, above all, establish the
position of the union as a responsible agent in the community, ready to
abide by the law. This would be of immense advantage to the union in all
its operations.

Again, it has been urged that the incorporation of the union would lead
to a multiplication of lawsuits, which would involve the union in great
expense; but the expense of conducting such litigation would be
insignificant as compared with the benefits which would result to the
union from holding a recognized and responsible position in the
community.

Again, it has been urged that the unions would not fear litigation if
justice were promptly administered; but that it was the dragging out of
litigation which was to be apprehended. I take it that, so far as the
unions have suffered from the administration of the law, it has not been
from delays but from precipitancy. They have suffered at times in the
granting of preliminary injunctions, injunctions which have been more
readily granted because of the irresponsible position of the defendants.

Again, it has been urged that the unions might be willing to submit
themselves readily to suit if the rules of law, as now administered by
the courts, were not unjust to labor. I am inclined to think that there
have been rendered in this country many decisions which do unduly
restrict the activity of the unions. But the way to correct the evil of
an unjust decision is not to evade the law but to amend it. The unions
should take the position squarely that they are amenable to law,
prepared to take the consequences if they transgress, and thus show that
they are in full sympathy with the spirit of our people, whose political
system rests upon the proposition that this is a government of law, and
not of men.
