# HOW BOSTON SOLVED THE GAS PROBLEM[^10/1]


[^10/1]: Published in *American Review of Reviews*, November, 1907

Shall the public utilities be owned by the public? --- is a question
pressing for decision in nearly every American city.

To aid in its proper solution the National Civic Federation began about
two years ago a comprehensive investigation of representative American
and British gas, water, electric light and street railway plants, with a
view to comparing the advantages and disadvantages of private and public
ownership. The opinions of the experts upon the data so collected appear
to be widely divergent and to indicate, so far as they can be reconciled
at all, that neither private nor public ownership, as ordinarily
practiced, is wholly satisfactory.

While this investigation was proceeding, Massachusetts entered, in
connection with the Boston gas supply, upon an experiment, new in
America, which may lead to the best practical solution of the
public-utilities problem. The new Boston system creates substantially a
partnership between the public and the stockholders of the gas
company --- a partnership in which the public will secure an
ever-increasing share of the profits of the business.

This system has already given to Boston eighty-cent gas, although Boston
is located many hundred miles from the mines which supply its coal.
Eighty cents is a lower price for gas than is actually enjoyed by any
other city in the United States, except a few within the coal and oil
region, like Cleveland or Wheeling, and Redlands and Santa Ana, Cal.
Even in those cities the price is not lower than seventy-five cents --- a
price which Boston may reasonably expect to attain soon. For, during the
two years ending July 1,1907, four reductions in price each of five
cents have been made. To have reduced the price of gas 20%
during that period of generally rising prices in labor and materials is
certainly a notable achievement. The most recent reductions in price
were the wholly voluntary acts of the company, made under wise laws
framed in the interest both of the public and of the stockholders. The
saving to the gas consumer by these reductions was in the first year
\$265,404.55, in the second year \$565,725.60, and will be in the third
(the current) year about \$800,000.

That this saving to the consumer was not attained by a sacrifice of the
interests of the stockholder may be inferred from the market price of
the stock of the association which controls the gas company. In the two
years following the legislation of 1905, a period in which most other
stocks depreciated largely, the common stock of the Massachusetts Gas
Companies rose from 44½ to 57½; and even in the severe stock
depression of September, 1907, this stock was firm at 52.

Compare with the results of the Boston experiment the attempt in New
York City made at about the same time to reduce the price of gas from
one dollar to eighty cents by legislative fiat and the compulsory orders
of the State commission. The New York company contended that the law was
unconstitutional; the federal court issued an injunction; the consumer
still pays out one dollar for each one thousand feet of gas; and the
market price of the stock of the Consolidated Gas Company of New York
fell during the same period of two years from 200 to 118, and in
September, 1907, to 96¾.

But Boston has reaped from the sliding-scale system as applied under
President Richards\' administration of the company far more than cheaper
gas and higher security values. It has been proved that a public-service
corporation may be managed with political honesty, and yet successfully,
and that its head may become a valuable public servant. The officers and
employees of the gas company now devote themselves strictly to the
business of making and distributing gas, instead of dissipating their
abilities, as heretofore, in lobbying and political intrigue. As a
result, gas properties which throughout the greater part of twenty years
had been the subject of financial and political scandals, developing
ultimately bitter hostility on the part of the people, are now conducted
in a manner so honorable as to deserve and to secure the highest public
commendation.

The passage of the Sliding Scale Act of 1906 marked the close of the
campaign upon which the Public Franchise League entered in 1903. All
Massachusetts gas companies had since 1885 been subject to the
supervision of a State commission with very broad powers, including that
of fixing prices. New securities could be issued only with the
commission\'s approval. For many years stringent laws prohibiting
stock-watering had been in force. While these laws are of great value
and have protected Massachusetts from many of the evils of corporate
management from which other States have suffered, dissatisfaction with
conditions from time to time prevailing in connection with the Boston
gas supply was persistent and well founded. Boston tried successively
\"regulated\" monopoly, competition and the combination of gas
companies. The service was poor and the management unprogressive. The
price of gas, which after a strenuous contest had been reduced in parts
of Boston to one dollar in 1893, appeared to be immutable.

The application to the legislature made in 1903 for leave to consolidate
the several Boston companies then in combination afforded the Public
Franchise League its opportunity. Several minor provisions were inserted
in the consolidation act designed to protect the people\'s rights, and
the issue of capital by the united company was limited to the net \"fair
value of the plants and property of the several corporations as the same
shall be determined\" by the gas and electric light commissioners,
\"without enhancement on account of the value of franchises or earning
capacity or on account of exclusive privileges derived from rights in
the public streets.\"

The aggregate outstanding securities of the constituent companies had a
par value of only \$15,124,121 (of which \$9,309,600 was stock and
\$5,814,521 funded debt). But when, in 1904, application was made under
the act to fix the capital, the companies claimed that the properties
had recently cost the then owners over \$24,000,000, that their
replacement value was about the same amount, and that the fair value for
capitalization should be not less than \$20,609,989.99. The Public
Franchise League, on the other hand, contended that substantially any
excess in value over the \$15,124,121 represented not contributions by
stockholders, but accumulations from excessive payments exacted from gas
consumers; that in the reorganization of the business such value should
not be capitalized; and that the Consolidated Company\'s capital stock
should therefore be limited to the aggregate of the capital of the
constituent companies then outstanding, plus such additional amount o£
stock as it might be necessary to issue at its estimated market value
(which was above the par value) to provide funds for paying off all
existing indebtedness. The league deemed the retention of the original
capital so augmented of fundamental importance, mainly because the
payment of a high rate of dividend on a small capital issue would tend
to keep the public vigilant.

After a long and bitter struggle the gas companies, acting under the
enlightened and able leadership of Mr. Richards, agreed, in 1905, with
the Public Franchise League upon legislation which provided that the
capital of the consolidated company should be limited to the aggregate
par value of the outstanding stock and funded indebtedness of the
constituent companies, to wit: \$15,124,000; that the maximum price of
gas in Boston should be reduced to ninety cents within twelve months
after the consolidation was effected; and that the governor should
appoint a commission to consider and report to the next legislature
whether the adoption in Boston of the so-called London sliding scale
system for \"the automatic and interdependent adjustment of the price of
gas to consumers and the rate of dividends to stockholders of gas
companies\" was expedient. The favorable recommendation of the minority
of this commission, Messrs. James E. Cotter and Charles P. Hall, was
supported by the Public Franchise League and the gas company, and on May
26, 1906, the Sliding Scale Act received Governor Guild\'s approval in
spite of the strenuous opposition of both conservatives and radicals.

The Boston Sliding Scale Act, which embodies with some modifications the
main provisions of the system widely used in England, provides as
follows:

*First*. Ninety cents per thousand feet of gas (that is, the maximum
price then actually charged by the Boston company) is made the
\"standard price\" of gas.

*Second*. Seven % (that is, one % less than the dividend
which was then being paid by the Boston company) is made the \"standard
dividend.\"

*Third*. The company is prohibited from paying more than seven %
dividend unless and until one year after it shall have reduced the price
of gas below ninety cents, and then may increase its dividend at the
rate of one % for every five cents reduction in the price of gas.

*Fourth*. New stock can be issued only with the consent of the Gas and
Electric Light Commissioners, and must be sold at auction at such
minimum price and under such other conditions as the Commissioners
prescribe.

*Fifth*. Provision is made for determining annually, and publishing in
detail in the newspapers, the cost of manufacturing and distributing
gas.

*Sixth*. After the expiration of ten years, the Gas and Electric Light
Commissioners may, upon petition, \"lower or raise the standard price
per thousand feet to such extent as may justly be required by reason of
greater or less burden which may be imposed upon the company by reason
of improved methods in the art of manufacture, by reason of changes in
prices of materials and labor, or by reason of changes in other
conditions affecting the general cost of manufacture or distribution of
gas.\"

A seven % dividend upon the capital of the consolidated company
was equivalent to a return of about 4.35% on the replacement
value of the gas properties as testified to, and of their cost to the
then owners. The \"standard dividend,\" therefore, though nominally
seven %, represented but a modest return upon the capital then
recently invested, and was about \$150,000 less than the aggregate
amount then being paid by the several companies as return upon capital.
Nevertheless strenuous opposition was made to the Sliding Scale bill on
the ground that successive reductions in price would enable the gas
company to pay very large dividends. The Public Franchise League
recognized fully that after a few years\' operation under the act much
larger dividends would probably be paid than capital as capital is
entitled to when employed in a business which is not only safe because
it enjoys a substantial monopoly, but which also receives from the
community without the payment of any compensation the license to lay and
maintain its pipes in the public streets. The League insisted, however,
that the proper aim of the public must be not to limit dividends, but to
secure gas of good quality at low prices; that a limitation of dividends
was desirable only when it conduced to that end; and that under proper
conditions a reasonable assurance of the undisturbed enjoyment of large
dividends might be the best method of attaining cheap gas.

The League therefore urged that the possibility of a large return upon
capital offered under the sliding scale system should be regarded merely
as an incentive to securing for the gas business the kind of management
most likely to produce and distribute gas at the lowest possible cost,
and thus supply an essential prerequisite to cheap gas. Protection
against corporate abuses demands for gas companies strict supervision
and publicity. Fairness demands that proper compensation be made in some
form for the use of our streets. But no self-sustaining system of
supplying gas can give to the people cheap gas unless it rests upon high
efficiency in management.

The gas business has many of the characteristics of both manufacturing
and merchandizing. Like other manufacturing businesses, it produces an
article for sale. The cost of its produce is dependent largely upon the
character and condition of the plant; upon the extent to which labor and
waste-saving devices are adopted; upon the skill with which raw
materials and supplies are purchased and waste or residual products are
disposed of; and whether the plant is operated to its full capacity.

To an even greater extent than in most mercantile businesses, the _pro
rata_ cost of distribution of gas is dependent upon large volume. The
distributing plant requires an exceptionally large investment. But the
mains or pipes are rarely used to their full capacity. The interest,
depreciation and maintenance charges are the same whatever the volume of
sales. The inspection of meter, and many other charges, increase but
slightly with the increase of sales. The _pro rata_ cost of distributing
gas diminishes largely, therefore, with the increase in the quantity
sold. But, as in most mercantile businesses, the quantity of gas which
can be sold in any of our large cities is dependent mainly upon the
skill, energy, initiative and intelligence with which the business is
conducted. The demand for gas is not a fixed quantity. There is,
undoubtedly, a minimum quantity which will be used under almost any
conceivable circumstances. But limits can scarcely be set to the
possible increase of its use in our large cities. Not only is there an
ever-growing demand for intense artificial lighting of public places,
stores and residences, but there is an almost limitless field now
occupied by electric light, coal and oil, of which gas is the natural
competitor. The limits of the use of gas in any city, therefore, will be
set mainly by the skill, energy and initiative of those who manage the
business and by the extent to which they appreciate the fact that
increased use of gas will result from reduction in price, bettering of
appliances and improving facilities.

A management possessing the requisite ability and skill for such a
business and which would exercise the requisite vigilance and energy may
be best secured by following those lines upon which the remarkable
industrial advance of America has proceeded, the lines of intelligent
self-interest. Those who manage our gas companies and other
public-service corporations should be permitted, subject to the
limitations stated above, to conduct the enterprise under the conditions
which in ordinary business have proved a sufficient incentive to attract
men of large ability, and to insure from them their utmost efforts for
its advancement. These essential conditions are:

\(a\) The right to enjoy a fair share of the fruits of successful
effort.

\(b\) The opportunity of devoting one\'s whole efforts to developing the
business.

\(c\) The probability of pursuing for a reasonable time without
interruption such business policy as may be adopted.

The Public Franchise League believed that the sliding scale system
supplies in large measure these conditions essential to the successful
conduct of our public services --- conditions which are in no respect
inconsistent with the restrictions demanded for a proper protection of
the public interests. It believed also that the Boston company possessed
in its president, Mr. Richards, a man of the character and ability
required to make the sliding scale system a pronounced success. The
results of the new law under his administration have happily confirmed
the judgment of the League.

The rate of increase in savings to the gas consumer noted above --- that
is, from \$265,404.55 in the first year to \$800,000 (estimated) for the
third year --- is due in large measure to the rapid successive reductions
in the price of gas; and, obviously, further reductions will come more
slowly. But further reductions may be expected, both because of the
growing efficiency of the management, and the rapidly increasing
consumption of gas.

The efficiency of the management is being promoted largely through the
voluntary extension by the company of the sliding scale principle to its
employees. Under this wise provision 681 employees receive, in addition
to regular wages, a dividend on their wages, at the same rate as the
dividend on capital stock paid to stockholders. And these 681 employees
have either already become stockholders, or under the operation of the
system will soon be such.

Even without further reductions in price, some increase in the saving to
the people may be expected each year. For it is one of the great merits
of the sliding scale system that while, upon reduction in price, the
increased dividend is figured from year to year upon the same or
substantially the same capital, the saving in price is practically
certain to be figured upon an ever-increasing quantity sold. The
reduction in price increases sales; and the increase of sales renders
further reductions in price possible. The sales of the Boston company to
consumers in the year ending June 30, 1907, were 23.73% greater
than in the year ending June 30, 1905--- the first reduction in price
having been made as of July 1, 1905. The sales from July 1, 1907 (when
the price was reduced to eighty cents), to October 1, 1907, were 16.6% greater than that of the corresponding period of the preceding
year. It is expected that the company will this year increase its
dividend rate one %, calling for an additional payment to
stockholders of \$151,240; but the people will save in the current year
(as compared with the standard price of ninety-cent gas) about
\$400,000. When the eighty-cent rate shall have been in force twelve
months the company may increase its dividends, if earned, by another one
%. But it cannot be so earned without a further increase in
consumption of gas, which in turn must result in further reduction of
cost and further increase of the amount saved by the people. The
experience of the English companies under the sliding scale system shows
that while, at the outset, the saving to the community and the amount
paid on the increase of dividend were about equal, after a series of
years the savings to the consumer were from three to seven times as
great as the increase of dividends to stockholders.

If the demand for municipal ownership in America can be stayed, it will
be by such wise legislation as the Public Franchise League has promoted
and by such public service as Mr. Richards and his associates are
rendering in the management of a private corporation.
