# THE NEW ENGLAND TRANSPORTATION MONOPOLY[^17/1]


[^17/1]: An address delivered before the New England Dry Goods Association at Boston, February 11, 1908.

*Mr. President and Gentlemen of the New England Dry Goods
Association*:---

The proposed merger presents for the decision of the people of
Massachusetts the most important question which has arisen in this
Commonwealth since the Civil War. I regret deeply, therefore, that the
eminent counsel of the New York, New Haven and Hartford Railroad Company
should have declined the invitation of your association to present an
argument in favor of the merger. His refusal to discuss the question,
following many like refusals of invitations extended by other
associations to President Mellen and Vice-President Byrnes, is obviously
in pursuance of a definite policy, and the policy appears to be this:
Having actually acquired the large block of stock in the Boston and
Maine Railroad secretly and without authority under the laws of
Massachusetts --- \"the less said about it, the better.\" Against this
Standard Oil policy of \"Secrecy and Silence,\" the opponents of the
merger vigorously protest.

Let us define what the merger question really is, and recall the
circumstances under which it has arisen in Massachusetts.

The merger question is this: Shall the New York, New Haven and Hartford
Railroad Company be permitted to acquire, through control of the Boston
and Maine, a substantial monopoly of all transportation within New
England and from New England to the South and West --- a monopoly
including alike steam railroads, trolleys and steamboat lines?

The circumstances under which this question arises are as follows:

For more than a generation the statutes of Massachusetts have declared
that no railroad company shall acquire the stock of any other railroad
company or of any street railway company without the express authority
of our legislature. This has been the law of Massachusetts during all
the time that the New York, New Haven and Hartford has operated any
railroad in this Commonwealth.

## THE NEW HAVEN DEFIANCE OF MASSACHUSETTS LAWS

With this law on the statute books, the New Haven Company, without
seeking permission from our legislature, acquired within three years
prior to June, 1906, nearly five hundred miles of trolleys in central
and western Massachusetts. These trolley purchases threatened to extend
into the Boston and Maine territory. The Boston and Maine had carefully
obeyed the Massachusetts law which prohibited it from making trolley
purchases; and it sought in 1905 authority from our legislature to do
with the legislature\'s permission what the New Haven undertook to do in
spite of legislative prohibition. The proposed change in the
long-established policy of the Commonwealth was strenuously opposed. The
question was referred to the Recess Committee of the legislature of
1905; and the question was again considered by the legislature of 1906,
which refused to grant the permission asked.

Governor Guild then called attention to the situation in a memorable
special message to the legislature (June 23, 1906) in which he said:

\"I congratulate you on the defeat of a measure that would have
sanctioned the possible consolidation of all transportation in
Massachusetts under the control of a single corporation. The present
railroad situation, however, is most unjust and inequitable. Our steam
railroad system is forbidden to meet the competition of electric street
car lines by purchase or control of their stock, but another controlled
by men who are not citizens of Massachusetts is not only permitted to
exercise that privilege, but is exerting it to-day to such an extent
that healthy competition in western Massachusetts is already throttled.

\"Slowly, surely, the control of our own railroads, the control of the
passage to market of every Massachusetts product, the control of the
transportation to and from his work of every Massachusetts citizen is
passing from our hands to those of aliens.

\"I therefore urge upon you with all the strength that is in me the
passage of some legislation giving relief from this grave injustice. Let
Massachusetts announce that transportation within her borders is in the
future to be controlled by the people of Massachusetts, and not by men
beyond the reach of her law and the inspiration of her ideals.\"

The message was immediately referred to the joint Committee on Railroads
and Street Railways. It was then late in June. The session had already
lasted nearly six months. All other legislative business had been
disposed of. It was urged that consideration of a subject so important
should not then be entered upon. The New Haven Company insisted that it
had no intention of violating the laws of Massachusetts; that it had
been advised that, while the Massachusetts statute controlled
Massachusetts corporations, like the Boston and Maine, the New Haven
Company, having a Connecticut charter and operating through a subsidiary
company, could legally purchase railroads and street railways in this
State, regardless of the prohibition contained in the Massachusetts
statute. It invited the Attorney General to bring proceedings to test
the legal validity of its action. The New Haven Company asserted,
furthermore, that it had no intent or desire to act contrary to what
Massachusetts might declare to be its own policy in this respect.

## THE NEW HAVEN BREACH OF FAITH

It was naturally suggested that this attitude on the part of the New
Haven was assumed in order to delay legislation, so that meanwhile it
might have the opportunity of continuing unhampered its purchases of
Massachusetts properties. To meet this objection the following assurance
was given to the legislative committee by the counsel of the New Haven
Company:

June 27, 1906

Representative Joseph Walker, Esq.

*My Dear Mr. Walker* ---

I have communicated with Mr. Mellen by telephone and got from him the
following:

\"Mr. Mellen authorizes Mr. Choate to state to the Legislature that he
will not enter upon further acquisitions in Massachusetts other than
those already contracted for, or build any trolley lines except such as
are now under actual construction, until such time as the merger
question has been settled.

\"Mr. Mellen is willing, if the Committee desires it, to furnish a list
of properties already contracted for or under construction, to avoid any
future misunderstanding.\"

Yours truly,

(Signed) CHARLES F. CHOATE, JR.

The list of Massachusetts trolley properties in which the New Haven was
then interested was asked for and was furnished by Mr. Mellen. After
that the legislature refused to pass any act dealing with this subject,
and adjourned. Proceedings were then begun by the Attorney General to
test the validity of the New Haven\'s position. While these proceedings
were pending, the New Haven Company, regardless of the promise which had
been given by Mr. Mellen on its behalf, proceeded with its purchases of
Massachusetts trolleys. It bought the Milford, Attleborough, and
Woonsocket Street Railway Company; it bought the Hartford and Worcester,
the Uxbridge and Blackstone and the Worcester and Holden Street Railway
Companies. It acquired still other Massachusetts trackage through the
Providence Securities Company.

And it did more. It acquired, without application to the legislature,
and without notice in any way to the public, a large block of stock of
the Boston and Maine Railroad --- 109,948 shares out of a total of 295,096
outstanding in the hands of the public.

The great merger issue, the most important question which has arisen in
Massachusetts in more than a generation, is thus brought before us by
conduct on the part of the New Haven, which is not only in defiance of
the settled policy of Massachusetts, as expressed in its statute law,
but in defiance also of the promise solemnly given to the legislature of
the Commonwealth and relied upon by it.

## THE PROPOSED TRANSPORTATION MONOPOLY

Now, let us pass to the question of the merger itself and what it
involves:

The possible advantages of a merger have not been made clear; but the
objections, I submit, are clear, and they are insuperable.

*First*. The merger would result inevitably in a complete monopoly of
transportation in New England.

It would mean control by the New Haven, not only of the Boston and Maine
and the Maine Central systems, but of all railroads extending into New
England, except the Grand Trunk and the Canadian Pacific. Outside the
New Haven, the Boston and Maine and the Canadian systems, there is now
no important railroad in New England, except the Boston and Albany and
the Bangor and Aroostook. The Boston and Albany is already closely
allied with the New Haven through a traffic arrangement. It will
inevitably fall into the New Haven\'s grasp if the Boston and Maine
does. So also will the Bangor and Aroostook and the small outlying
roads.

But the merger means far more than a monopoly of the railroads. The New
Haven has pursued relentlessly in each community to which its railroads
extend the policy of suppressing all competition whatsoever, existing or
potential --- suppressing, at whatever cost, the competition not only of
railroads but of steamship lines and of trolley lines as well. What it
has already done in Connecticut and Rhode Island would inevitably be
repeated in Massachusetts and in northern New England.

See how the New Haven has suppressed all competition between Boston and
New York:

The New York and New England Railroad was designed to give us an
independent all-rail line to New York. The New Haven induced the
Connecticut legislature to refuse authority to construct the missing
link. The New York and New England, however, actually gave us an
independent rail and water line to New York via Norwich and a freight
line via the Hudson River. The New York and New England passed into the
hands of receivers and was purchased by the New Haven.

The Central New England Railroad intended (in connection with the Boston
and Albany) to give us an independent line to the Pennsylvania coal
fields, and another freight line to New York via the Hudson River. It
met persistent obstruction in the legislature and in the courts of
Connecticut. Its securities suffered, and it passed into the control of
the New Haven.

A few years ago we had four rail and water lines to New York *via* the
Sound --- the Fall River Line, the Providence Line, the Stonington Line
and the Norwich Line. All of these have passed into the hands of the New
Haven; and another rail and water line to New York --- the New Bedford
Line --- belongs also to the New Haven. Later a new competitor --- the Joy
Line --- arose; but soon it also passed into New Haven control.

Finally the Enterprise Transportation Company was started, with boats
running from New York to Fall River and to Providence, and with good
promise of success. The New Haven, under secret cover of the Neptune
Line and of the Joy Line, entered into fierce competition with the
Enterprise Transportation Company. Last October the Enterprise
Transportation Company succumbed. It passed into the hands of a
receiver, and shortly after the New Haven purchased the *Kennebec*, one
of its best boats.

Not a single independent line of steamboats exists between Massachusetts
and New York except the Metropolitan Line; and now that, like other
competitors of the New Haven, has passed into receivers\' hands. May we
not expect to see, as the next step, its fine steam-ships, the *Harvard*
and the *Yale*, flying the New Haven flag, and the last vestige of
steamship competition disappear?

A few years ago we heard promises of independent trolley lines from
Boston to New York. The key to such a line was a franchise east from New
York City. Two franchises were given --- the New York, Westchester, and
Boston Railway Company and the New York and Port Chester Railroad
Company --- both given with the understanding that they should provide
competition with the New Haven. The New Haven, at huge expense, acquired
both franchises, and suppressed the nascent competition.

The policy of suppressing competition at any cost, pursued with respect
to through lines between Boston and New York, has been followed by the
New Haven throughout its territory. Under that policy the New Haven has
acquired in all about fifteen hundred miles of trolley
tracks --- substantially all the trolleys in Connecticut and in Rhode
Island, and nearly six hundred miles of line in central and western
Massachusetts. It has even extended its lines into Vermont and northern
New York.

No competitor was too large to be overcome, and none so insignificant as
to be tolerated. Thus the New Haven acquired the lesser steam-boat lines
from New York to Connecticut and to Rhode Island ports --- the Bridgeport
Line, the New Haven Line, the Hartford Line and the Block Island Line.
And with this nearer field covered, it undertook to extend its
acquisitions to more distant ports, far beyond the present territory of
its rail lines. It purchased, at large cost, a line from New York to
Portland, Maine. It purchased a line from Boston to Philadelphia; and
then, in connection with that purchase, it acquired a substantially
controlling interest in the Merchants & Miners Transportation Company,
with lines from Boston to Philadelphia, to Baltimore and to Norfolk.

If the New Haven secures the Boston and Maine system, it appears
inevitable that the control which the New Haven has already acquired
over the Boston and Albany through a traffic agreement will become
practically absolute, that the New Haven\'s policy of acquiring trolleys
will be further extended, and that soon all means of transportation by
steam, by trolleys or by established steamship lines within New England,
or from New England south and west, will be absolutely under New Haven
control. The only other outlet for the people and products of
Massachusetts will be across the Atlantic or to Canada.

## AN ALIEN MONOPOLY

*Second*. This monopoly by the New Haven in transportation within New
England and from New England south and west would be controlled by
persons alien to Massachusetts, not only in their financial interests,
but in their traditions and aspirations. How little the voice of
Massachusetts would be heeded in the management may be inferred from the
present conditions.

Although more than one-half of the stockholders of the New Haven are
residents of Massachusetts, and although they owned, June 30, 1907,
\$35,000,000 out of \$97,000,000 of New Haven stock outstanding in the
hands of the public, as well as a larger part of its outstanding bonds
and notes, Massachusetts has to-day upon the board of directors of the
New Haven only two members out of twenty-three. It had one other member,
making up the full board of twenty-four, but Mr. Charles F. Choate, long
a member of the New Haven board, resigned recently.

Apparently the influence of the Massachusetts members in the board has
been proportionate to their number.

## ALIEN INTERESTS

*Third*. This monopoly in transportation would not only be controlled by
non-residents of Massachusetts, but, as the New Haven\'s transportation
lines would extend into at least six other States, the management,
though intending to act with entire fairness to Massachusetts, might
deem it proper to postpone the interests of Massachusetts to those of
some other State or States. It might seem best to the management of this
transportation monopoly to favor New York, or New London, or Providence,
or Portland, as against Boston, not from any malevolent motive, but
solely in the supposed interests of the company.

Yet we of Massachusetts have the solemn obligation of protecting and
advancing our own welfare. We must not intrust the determination as to
what our welfare demands to the decision of persons who may be
influenced by considerations other than the interests of Massachusetts.

## COMBINATION INEFFICIENT

*Fourth*. The very size of the proposed consolidated system and the
diversity of its interests would be such as to impair its efficiency.
The company would not be merely a large railroad company, but an
aggregation of trolley companies, of steamship companies, of gas
companies and power companies, an electric light company and a
water-supply company. For thus comprehensive are the varying activities
of the New Haven.

For every business concern there must be a limit of greatest efficiency.
What that limit is differs under varying conditions; but it is clear
that an organization may be too large for efficient and economical
management, as well as too small. The disadvantages attendant upon size
may outweigh the advantages. Man\'s works have outgrown the capacity of
the individual man. No matter what the organization, the capacity of the
individual man must determine the success of a particular enterprise,
not only financially to the owners, but in service to the community.
Organization can do much to make possible larger efficient concerns; but
organization can never be a substitute for initiative and for judgment.
These must be supplied by the chief executive officers, and nature sets
a limit to their possible accomplishment. Any transportation system
which is called upon not merely to operate, but to develop its
facilities, makes heavy demands upon its executive officers for
initiative and for the exercise of sound judgment. And New England needs
most emphatically development of its transportation facilities. To aid
in this development we need more minds, not less.

Massachusetts has had and is having a lesson on the evils of too large
units which should not readily be overlooked, namely the wretched
service of the Boston and Albany Railroad. Even in mere operation that
railroad has failed egregiously as compared with its condition prior to
its lease to the New York Central. And what is the cause of this
failure? Not, I submit, intentional neglect, on the part of the
officials of the New York Central, of the interest of Massachusetts or
the comfort of its patrons; not any purpose on the part of the
management to prefer other communities to our own. The wretched service
is due, in the main at least, to the fact that the New York Central
System is greater than the administrative capacity of its executive
officers. From that overgrowth its finances, its service and its patrons
have alike suffered. And we may be sure that if we spread the ability of
the New Haven management over a larger field we shall get, not better,
but worse, service throughout the whole territory.

## POLITICAL DANGERS

*Fifth*. The political dangers surrounding a monster corporation
controlling all transportation facilities of New England are too obvious
to require comment, particularly in the case of a corporation having the
political traditions which surround the New Haven.

## IMPOSSIBLE TO \"SAFEGUARD\" MONOPOLY

*Sixth*. It has been suggested that we accept the proposed monopoly in
transportation, but provide safeguards.

This would be like surrendering liberty and substituting despotism with
safeguards. There is no way in which to safeguard people from despotism
except to prevent despotism. There is no way to safeguard the people
from the evils of a private transportation monopoly except to prevent
the monopoly. The objections to despotism and to monopoly are
fundamental in human nature. They rest upon the innate and ineradicable
selfishness of man. They rest upon the fact that absolute power
inevitably leads to abuse. They rest upon the fact that progress flows
only from struggle.

Furthermore, the most carefully devised safeguards are in many respects
futile. The legislation authorizing the Boston and Albany lease was
surrounded by all safeguards which an able governor, the legislature and
our business organizations could devise. Have these safeguarding
provisions reduced or made more tolerable the wretched service which we
have received?

## FALSE ANALOGY OF SOME LOCAL MONOPOLIES

*Seventh*. The analogy sometimes urged in favor of existing
well-operated local monopolies in lighting, or gas, or street railways
is delusive. In the first place a local gas company may have a monopoly
of gas, but it has not a monopoly of lighting. It has the competition of
electric light and the competition of oil.

But there is furthermore this marked difference: A local monopoly, like
a gas company, or an electric light company or a street railway company,
is but a creature, a servant of the State, wholly subject to the control
of the State within which it is situated, wholly dependent for its
prosperity upon the particular community which it serves; and in
Massachusetts subject at all times to being terminated by the authority
which created it.

The street railways of Massachusetts and the gas and electric light
companies of Massachusetts, so far as they are monopolies, are
performing practically, as agents of the State, public functions during
good behavior. If they do not properly serve the community, the
community may at any time terminate their franchises without even paying
compensation. The right to run street railways in our public streets,
the right to lay gas pipes or electric light wires, is a license merely,
and is subject at all times to termination by the State and the
municipal authorities. There is no resemblance between such a monopoly
of service covering a specific agency and the proposed New Haven
monopoly of all transportation, a monopoly which claims rights under the
laws of other States, and has asserted, though operating also in
Massachusetts, that it is free from the restrictions imposed by the
Massachusetts law. And yet even in respect to these local service
monopolies, Massachusetts recognized as early as 1894 that legislation
was necessary to protect our people from the abuses incident to their
being controlled by foreign corporations.

## THE DANGERS OF A HOLDING COMPANY

*Eighth*. Furthermore, it must be remembered that the New Haven Company
is not a transportation company merely. It is a huge holding company.
Its freedom in the issue of its own securities and its broad charter
powers to hold securities of other companies expose us to the same
conditions which have made Harriman a menace to America. The primal
cause of Harriman\'s power has been his ability to use the treasury and
credit of the Union Pacific for practically any purpose. The Union
Pacific was once a corporation with power to construct and operate a
railroad within given limits. It has become a corporation with almost
universal powers. And these large powers have been exercised practically
by one individual, instead of being subject to the action of the
stockholders.

Precisely similar operations may be pursued by the New Haven management,
particularly since it secured its new Connecticut charter. Indeed its
act in taking over this large interest in the Boston and Maine stock
without action on the part of its own stockholders shows the
extraordinary power heretofore exercised by the New Haven management.
And the position for the future is even more dangerous than it has been
in the past.

## THE NEW HAVEN\'S FINANCIAL CONDITION

*Ninth*. The above objections to the merger would exist even if the New
Haven were to-day the financially strong and conservatively managed
railroad which it was for many years prior to the advent of Mr. Mellen.
But its financial condition is vastly changed. Once financially the
strongest railroad company in America, it has by excessive expansion
become perilously weak. The burdens which it has assumed must for many
years greatly hamper its ability to serve the Commonwealth. Its impaired
credit will prevent it from making further large improvements. The
excessive prices paid to suppress trolley and steamboat competition
create a permanent heavy charge upon all future traffic. How it will be
able to bear the burdens thus created will, for some time, remain a
question. But it is clear that the burdens already assumed have taxed to
the uttermost, not only the ability of the managers, but the financial
resources of the company itself. There is no surplus of ability or of
credit which is available for extending its operations to another great
system with a railroad mileage larger than its own. (This subject was
discussed elaborately by Mr. Brandeis in a pamphlet entitled:
\"Financial Condition of the New York, New Haven & Hartford Railroad
Company and of the Boston and Maine Railroad,\" published in December,
1907.)

## THE BOSTON AND MAINE

*Tenth*. And the Boston and Maine system is a great system. Its physical
condition ought undoubtedly to be much improved. Additional facilities
should be added and developed. But it possesses a solid foundation upon
which to rest such development. The Boston and Maine is one of
America\'s leading railroad systems. Including leased lines and
railroads controlled but operated separately, it has 3,559.52 miles of
line, and a total trackage of 5,817.71 miles. For the year ending June
30, 1907, the gross earnings of the system from operation were
\$50,986,553.60. Of the 852 operating companies in the United States,
with an aggregate mileage of 220,028 miles, reporting to the Interstate
Commerce Commission for the year ending June 30, 1906, only thirteen had
gross earnings as large as that.

The miles of line owned or leased by the Boston and Maine Railroad are
2,232.25 as compared with 2,006.23 owned and leased by the New Haven.
The freight tonnage carried one mile on these lines by the Boston and
Maine Railroad in the year ending June 30, 1907, was 2,296,970,964 as
compared with 1,927,686,950 tons carried by the New Haven.

In the six years ending June 30, 1907, it increased its gross earnings
34.41%, while the increase of its capitalization was only 21.4%, and the fixed charges increased only 2.72%.

It is for Massachusetts to build up this distinctly Massachusetts
railroad so that it shall be worthy of Massachusetts; and the capital
required for making it meet all the demands of Massachusetts for proper
transportation facilities can be and should be had. Massachusetts now
recognizes the serious error which it committed in leasing the Boston
and Albany to the New York Central. It should not commit the infinitely
greater mistake of surrendering the Boston and Maine and its own
prosperity to the New Haven Company.

## IMMEDIATE LEGISLATION NECESSARY

*Eleventh*. The public did not discover until May, 1907, that the New
Haven Company had secretly acquired this large block of stock in the
Boston and Maine Railroad. It was then too late in the legislative
session adequately and definitely to consider the subject. The
legislature, with a view to providing for such consideration, passed a
temporary restraining act by which the New Haven was prohibited until
July 1, 1908, from attempting to vote on stock already acquired, or
otherwise exercising control over the Boston and Maine Railroad, and
from acquiring any additional stock in that company.

As this act expires July 1, 1908, and the New Haven Company, through the
possession of nearly forty % of the Boston and Maine stock, has
an interest so large that it may easily be converted into a working
majority, the merger of the two systems will be practically complete on
July 1, 1908, unless at the present session further legislation is
enacted which shall not only compel the New Haven Company to dispose of
the stock already acquired by it without authority under the laws of
Massachusetts, but shall also prohibit it from in any way undertaking to
exercise control over the Boston and Maine Railroad.

The control by the New Haven of the Boston and Maine through stock
ownership would be the most dangerous form of merger --- a merger with
full power and with no responsibility.

Governor Guild wisely said:

\"I therefore urge upon you with all the strength that is in me the
passage of some legislation giving relief from thus grave injustice. Let
Massachusetts announce that transportation within her borders is in the
future to be controlled by the people of Massachusetts, and not by men
beyond the reach of her law and the inspiration of her ideals.\"
