# AN AID TO RAILROAD EFFICIENCY[^19/1]


[^19/1]: A statement before the (Hadley) Railroad Securities Commission, March 6,1911. Published in *Engineering Magazine*, October, 1911.

The decision of the Interstate Commerce Commission having established
that there shall be no general advance in railroad freight rates, the
attention of the public should now be directed toward encouraging
improvements in service and in operating conditions and to the
development of transportation facilities. To this end greater efficiency
in management, and an ample supply of capital, are necessary.

Railroading being a private business, the corporations must, in order to
secure capital as well as ability and zeal in management, offer the
ordinary incentives incident to successful private businesses, namely,
liberal money rewards. Capital or property will yield vastly differing
returns according to the degree of judgment and efficiency applied in
management. In order to secure efficient administration of railroads, we
must make the rewards proportional to the efficiency. The establishment,
therefore, of any rule fixing a maximum return on capital invested in
railroads would tend to prevent efficiency by placing a limit on
achievement.

To-day even though no fixed maximum return is definitely adopted,
efficiency in management is in danger of being punished; whereas it
should be rewarded. Efficiency is naturally reflected in large net
earnings; and as no ready means exists for determining whether larger
net earnings are due to greater efficiency in management or to higher
rates, large earnings are frequently accepted as evidence that rates are
too high and lead to demands for reduction; when, in fact, the large
earnings may be due wholly to better management. To take from railroad
corporations the natural fruits of efficiency --- that is, greater money
rewards --- must create a sense of injustice suffered, which paralyzes
effort, invites inefficiency and produces slip-shod management. The
public interest, as well as justice, demands, therefore, the due
appreciation of greater efficiency in management, and the granting of
adequate rewards. In other words, private capital embarked in a
quasi-public business ought to receive compensation on a sliding scale;
so that the greater the service to the public, the greater the profit to
those furnishing that service.

Boston applied the sliding-scale system to the production and sale of
gas. There the dividend to the stockholders rises as the selling price
to the public is reduced; and that system has proved eminently
satisfactory both to the public and to the investor. The problem
presented in the gas business was so simple that it was possible to
apply the principle and make it operate automatically. The problem in
railroading is infinitely more difficult, owing to the complexities
arising from multitudinous rates, varying conditions and degrees of
service and interstate relations. But if the principle of the sliding
scale is once definitely recognized by the Interstate Commerce
Commission, State railroad commissions and the people, as properly
controlling the relations between the public and railroad corporations,
methods will undoubtedly be worked out in time by which it can be safely
applied.

The first step in applying the principle of the sliding scale must be,
however, to devise means of determining degrees of efficiency,--- and
that involves determining the unit cost of each operation on each
railroad. Unless costs are so ascertained, no true measure of efficiency
can be arrived at. The knowledge that the average annual cost per
locomotive for repairs, renewals and depreciation on one railroad is
\$3832.37 and on another is \$2709.27 would be a very unsafe ground for
determining the relative economy of operation on the two railroads. The
conditions on the two railroads and the standards of renewal and
depreciation may vary so greatly that the company expending the greater
sum may actually have conducted its locomotive use and repair more
economically and efficiently than the railroad expending less. We must
reduce each operation to its ultimate unit and ascertain the cost of
that before a proper basis of comparison can be secured. We must learn
not merely the cost of turning a wheel of a standard size and character,
the cost of laying a tie or a rail under standard conditions; but even
these relatively simple operations must be again analyzed and separated
into their component elements before a safe basis of relative costs can
be arrived at.

The fact that railroads are subject in their accounting to the orders of
the Interstate Commerce Commission makes it possible to require that
each company should ascertain and report to the commission the ultimate
unit costs of each operation in each department of the railroad. The
further fact that the railroad business is largely non-competitive,
makes it proper to publish these costs and to give to each railroad the
benefit of knowing the lowest unit cost of each operation attained by
any railroad and how it was attained.

To aid in this work the Interstate Commerce Commission should establish
a Bureau of Railroad Costs by which the ascertainment of costs may be
supervised and the results analyzed, classified and compared. Knowledge
of the best methods would thus become the common property of railroad
men. That alone would lead directly to great advances in efficiency and
economy. But the adoption of the best existing methods would be merely
the beginning of the great advance. The ascertainment of the lowest
existing costs would inevitably be followed by widespread striving to
eliminate further waste of time, effort and material and to find ever
better methods. With the introduction of exact tests of efficiency, with
the establishment of dependable standards of comparison, railroad
operation would soon develop into a recognized profession; and those who
pursue it would be stimulated like scientists and engineers to ever
higher achievements.

There should be established also an Experiment Station in Railroad
Efficiency. Such a station could be conducted similarly to the
Agricultural experiment stations and the Office of Roads in the
Department of Agriculture. The former has been potent in raising the
standard in agriculture; the latter has advanced road-building
throughout the United States. The cooperation of the government in
furthering railroad efficiency would be no less effective. The Bureau
would undoubtedly develop valuable inventions and discoveries in its own
laboratories, as the various experiment stations of the Agricultural
Department have done. But it would be of even greater service in testing
the inventions made and methods suggested by others; and it could bring
those of especial value to the attention of the railroads. Hundreds of
inventions, hundreds of new methods which, if adopted, would enhance the
efficiency of railroad operation, and introduce economies of wide scope,
have remained unused, because they are not known to the operating men.
Many of these inventions are not now in use merely because no single
railroad was willing to give the time or incur the expense of testing
their value; many because the inventor or discoverer was unable to
secure a hearing or a fair test. There are undoubtedly also a large
number of devices and methods in use in foreign countries of which our
railway managers have either no knowledge or have but inadequate
information.

It is a proper function of our government to make such investigations
and to give to the railroads the benefit thereof. The railroads are the
greatest single industry in the United States next to agriculture. The
interest of the general public to secure efficient and economical
transportation is so great that the government would be fully justified
in incurring any reasonable expense to aid in increasing railroad
efficiency. And in view of the obligations already assumed by the
government in the regulation of railroad rates and service, it should
proceed now to thus lend its aid to the railroads, securing to them
greater justice by permitting them to enjoy earnings on capital in
proportion to the efficiency of their management.
