# THE OPPORTUNITY IN THE LAW[^21/1]


[^21/1]: An address delivered May 4, 1905, at Phillips Brooks House, before the Harvard Ethical Society.

I assume that in asking me to talk to you on the Ethics of the Legal
Profession, you do not wish me to enter upon a discussion of the
relation of law to morals, or to attempt to acquaint you with those
detailed rules of ethics which lawyers have occasion to apply from day
to day in their practice. What you want is this: Standing not far from
the threshold of active life, feeling the generous impulse for service
which the University fosters, you wish to know whether the legal
profession would afford you special opportunities for usefulness to your
fellow-men, and, if so, what the obligations and limitations are which
it imposes. I say special opportunities, because every legitimate
occupation, be it profession or business or trade, furnishes abundant
opportunities for usefulness, if pursued in what Matthew Arnold called
\"the grand manner.\" It is, as a rule, far more important *how* men
pursue their occupation than *what* the occupation is which they select.

But the legal profession does afford in America unusual opportunities
for usefulness. That this has been so in the past, no one acquainted
with the history of our institutions can for a moment doubt. The great
achievement of the English-speaking people is the attainment of liberty
through law. It is natural, therefore, that those who have been trained
in the law should have borne an important part in that struggle for
liberty and in the government which resulted. Accordingly, we find that
in America the lawyer was in the earlier period almost omnipresent in
the State. Nearly every great lawyer was then a statesman; and nearly
every statesman, great or small, was a lawyer. DeTocqueville, the first
important foreign observer of American political institutions, said of
the United States seventy-five years ago:

\"In America there are no nobles or literary men, and the people are apt
to mistrust the wealthy; lawyers, consequently, form the highest
political class ... As the lawyers form the only enlightened class whom
the people do not mistrust, they are naturally called upon to occupy
most of the public stations. They fill the legislative assemblies and
are at the head of the administration; they consequently exercise a
powerful influence upon the formation of the law and upon its
execution.\"

For centuries before the American Revolution the lawyer had played an
important part in England. His importance in the State became much
greater in America. One reason for this, as DeTocqueville indicated, was
the fact that we possessed no class like the nobles, which took part in
government through privilege. A more potent reason was that with the
introduction of a written constitution the law became with us a far more
important factor in the ordinary conduct of political life than it did
in England. Legal questions were constantly arising and the lawyer was
necessary to settle them. But I take it the paramount reason why the
lawyer has played so large a part in our political life is that his
training fits him especially to grapple with the questions which are
presented in a democracy.

The whole training of the lawyer leads to the development of judgment.
His early training --- his work with books in the study of legal
rules --- teaches him patient research and develops both the memory and
the reasoning faculties. He becomes practised in logic; and yet the use
of the reasoning faculties in the study of law is very different from
their use, say, in metaphysics. The lawyer\'s processes of reasoning,
his logical conclusions, are being constantly tested by experience. He
is running up against facts at every point. Indeed it is a maxim of the
law: Out of the facts grows the law; that is, propositions are not
considered abstractly, but always with reference to facts.

Furthermore, in the investigation of the facts the lawyer differs very
materially from the scientist or the scholar. The lawyer\'s
investigations into the facts are limited by time and space. His
investigations have reference always to some practical end. Unlike the
scientist, he ordinarily cannot refuse to reach a conclusion on the
ground that he lacks the facts sufficient to enable one to form an
opinion. He must form an opinion from those facts which he has gathered;
he must reason from the facts within his grasp.

If the lawyer\'s practice is a general one, his field of observation
extends, in course of time, into almost every sphere of business and of
life. The facts so gathered ripen his judgment. His memory is trained to
retentiveness. His mind becomes practised in discrimination as well as
in generalization. He is an observer of men even more than of things. He
not only sees men of all kinds, but knows their deepest secrets; sees
them in situations which \"try men\'s souls.\" He is apt to become a
good judge of men.

Then, contrary to what might seem to be the habit of the lawyer\'s mind,
the practice of law tends to make the lawyer judicial in attitude and
extremely tolerant. His profession rests upon the postulate that no
contested question can be properly decided until both sides are heard.
His experience teaches him that nearly every question has two sides; and
very often he finds --- after decision of judge or jury --- that both he and
his opponent were in the wrong. The practice of law creates thus a habit
of mind, and leads to attainments which are distinctly different from
those developed in most professions or outside of the professions. These
are the reasons why the lawyer has acquired a position materially
different from that of other men. It is the position of the adviser of
men.

Your chairman said: \"People have the impression to-day that the lawyer
has become mercenary.\" It is true that the lawyer has become largely a
part of the business world. Mr. Bryce said twenty years ago when he
compared the America of 1885 with the America of DeTocqueville:

\"Taking a general survey of the facts of to-day, as compared with the
facts of sixty years ago, it is clear that the Bar counts for less as a
guiding and restraining power, tempering the crudity or haste of
democracy by its attachment to rule and precedent, than it did.\"

And in reviewing American conditions after his recent visit Mr. Bryce
said:

\"Lawyers are now to a greater extent than formerly business men, a part
of the great organized system of industrial and financial enterprise.
They are less than formerly the students of a particular kind of
learning, the practitioners of a particular art. And they do not seem to
be so much of a distinct professional class.\"

That statement was made by a very sympathetic observer of American
institutions; but it is clear that Mr. Bryce coincides in the view
commonly expressed, that the Bar had become commercialized through its
connection with business. I am inclined to think that this view is not
altogether correct. Probably business has become professionalized as
much as the Bar has become commercialized. Is it not this which has made
the lawyer so important a part of the business world?

The ordinary man thinks of the Bar as a body of men who are trying
cases, perhaps even trying criminal cases. Of course there is an immense
amount of litigation going on; and a great deal of the time of many
lawyers is devoted to litigation. But by far the greater part of the
work done by lawyers is done not in court, but in advising men on
important matters, and mainly in business affairs. In guiding these
affairs industrial and financial, lawyers are needed, not only because
of the legal questions involved, but because the particular mental
attributes and attainments which the legal profession develops are
demanded in the proper handling of these large financial or industrial
affairs. The magnitude and scope of these operations remove them almost
wholly from the realm of \"petty trafficking\" which people formerly
used to associate with trade. The questions which arise are more nearly
questions of statesmanship. The relations created call in many instances
for the exercise of the highest diplomacy. The magnitude, difficulty and
importance of the problems involved are often as great as in the matters
of state with which lawyers were formerly frequently associated. The
questions appear in a different guise; but they are similar. The
relations between rival railroad systems are like the relations between
neighboring kingdoms. The relations of the great trusts to the consumers
or to their employees is like that of feudal lords to commoners or
dependents. The relations of public-service corporations to the people
raise questions not unlike those presented by the monopolies of old.

So some of the ablest American lawyers of this generation, after acting
as professional advisers of great corporations, have become finally
their managers. The controlling intellect of the great Atchison Railroad
System, its vice-president, Mr. Victor Morawetz, graduated at the
Harvard Law School about twenty-five years ago, and shortly afterward
attained distinction by writing an extraordinarily good book on the Law
of Corporations. The head of the great Bell Telephone System of the
United States, Mr. Frederick P. Fish, was at the time of his appointment
to that office probably our leading patent lawyer. In the same way, and
for the same reason, lawyers have entered into the world of finance. Mr.
James J. Storrow, who was a law partner of Mr. Fish, has become a
leading member of the old banking firm of Lee, Higginson & Co. A former
law partner of Mr. Morawetz, Mr. Charles Steele, became a member of the
firm of J. P. Morgan & Co. Their legal training was called for in the
business world, because business has tended to become professionalized.
And thus, although the lawyer is not playing in affairs of state the
part he once did, his influence is, or at all events may be, quite as
important as it ever was in the United States; and it is simply a
question how that influence is to be exerted.

It is true that at the present time the lawyer does not hold as high a
position with the people as he held seventy-five or indeed fifty years
ago; but the reason is not lack of opportunity. It is this: Instead of
holding a position of independence, between the wealthy and the people,
prepared to curb the excesses of either, able lawyers have, to a large
extent, allowed themselves to become adjuncts of great corporations and
have neglected the obligation to use their powers for the protection of
the people. We hear much of the \"corporation lawyer,\" and far too
little of the \"people\'s lawyer.\" The great opportunity of the
American Bar is and will be to stand again as it did in the past, ready
to protect also the interests of the people.

Mr. Bryce, in discussing our Bar, said, in his \"American
Commonwealth\":

\"But I am bound to add that some judicious American observers hold that
the last thirty years have witnessed a certain decadence in the Bar of
the great cities. They say that the growth of the enormously rich and
powerful corporations willing to pay vast sums for questionable services
has seduced the virtue of some counsel whose eminence makes their
example important.\"

The leading lawyers of the United States have been engaged mainly in
supporting the claims of the corporations; often in endeavoring to evade
or nullify the extremely crude laws by which legislators sought to
regulate the power or curb the excesses of corporations.

Such questions as the regulation of trusts, the fixing of railway rates,
the municipalization of public utilities, the relation between capital
and labor, call for the exercise of legal ability of the highest order.
Up to the present time the legal ability of a high order which has been
expended on those questions has been almost wholly in opposition to the
contentions of the people. The leaders of the Bar, without any
preconceived intent on their part, and rather as an incident to their
professional standing, have, with rare exceptions, been ranged on the
side of the corporations, and the people have been represented, in the
main, by men of very meagre legal ability.

If these problems are to be settled right, this condition cannot
continue. Our country is, after all, not a country of dollars, but of
ballots. The immense corporate wealth will necessarily develop a
hostility from which much trouble will come to us unless the excesses of
capital are curbed, through the respect for law, as the excesses of
democracy were curbed seventy-five years ago. There will come a revolt
of the people against the capitalists, unless the aspirations of the
people are given some adequate legal expression; and to this end
cooperation of the abler lawyers is essential.

For nearly a generation the leaders of the Bar have, with few
exceptions, not only failed to take part in constructive legislation
designed to solve in the public interest our great social, economic and
industrial problems; but they have failed likewise to oppose legislation
prompted by selfish interests. They have often gone further in disregard
of common weal. They have often advocated, as lawyers, legislative
measures which as citizens they could not approve, and have endeavored
to justify themselves by a false analogy. They have erroneously assumed
that the rule of ethics to be applied to a lawyer\'s advocacy is the
same where he acts for private interests against the public, as it is in
litigation between private individuals.

The ethical question which laymen most frequently ask about the legal
profession is this: How can a lawyer take a case which he does not
believe in? The profession is regarded as necessarily somewhat immoral,
because its members are supposed to be habitually taking cases of that
character. As a practical matter, the lawyer is not often harassed by
this problem; partly because he is apt to believe, at the time, in most
of the cases that he actually tries; and partly because he either
abandons or settles a large number of those he does not believe in. But
the lawyer recognizes that in trying a case his prime duty is to present
his side to the tribunal fairly and as well as he can, relying upon his
adversary to present the other side fairly and as well as he can. Since
the lawyers on the two sides are usually reasonably well matched, the
judge or jury may ordinarily be trusted to make such a decision as
justice demands.

But when lawyers act upon the same principle in supporting the attempts
of their private clients to secure or to oppose legislation, a very
different condition is presented. In the first place, the counsel
selected to represent important private interests possesses usually
ability of a high order, while the public is often inadequately
represented or wholly unrepresented. Great unfairness to the public is
apt to result from this fact. Many bills pass in our legislatures which
would not have become law, if the public interest had been fairly
represented; and many good bills are defeated which if supported by able
lawyers would have been enacted. Lawyers have, as a rule, failed to
consider this distinction between practice in courts involving only
private interests, and practice before the legislature or city council
involving public interests. Some men of high professional standing have
even endeavored to justify their course in advocating professionally
legislation which in their character as citizens they would have voted
against.

Furthermore, lawyers of high standing have often failed to apply in
connection with professional work before the legislature or city council
a rule of ethics which they would deem imperative in practice before the
court. Lawyers who would indignantly retire from a court case in the
justice of which they believed, if they had reason to think that a juror
had been bribed or a witness had been suborned by their client, are
content to serve their client by honest arguments before a legislative
committee, although they have as great reason to believe that their
client has bribed members of the legislature or corrupted public
opinion. This confusion of ethical ideas is an important reason why the
Bar does not now hold the position which it formerly did as a brake upon
democracy, and which I believe it must take again if the serious
questions now before us are to be properly solved.

Here, consequently, is the great opportunity in the law. The next
generation must witness a continuing and ever-increasing contest between
those who have and those who have not. The industrial world is in a
state of ferment. The ferment is in the main peaceful, and, to a
considerable extent, silent; but there is felt to-day very widely the
inconsistency in this condition of political democracy and industrial
absolutism. The people are beginning to doubt whether in the long run
democracy and absolutism can coexist in the same community; beginning to
doubt whether there is a justification for the great inequalities in the
distribution of wealth, for the rapid creation of fortunes, more
mysterious than the deeds of Aladdin\'s lamp. The people have begun to
think; and they show evidences on all sides of a tendency to act. Those
of you who have not had an opportunity of talking much with laboring men
can hardly form a conception of the amount of thinking that they are
doing. With many these problems are all-absorbing. Many workingmen,
otherwise uneducated, talk about the relation of employer and employee
far more intelligently than most of the best educated men in the
community. The labor question involves for them the whole of life, and
they must in the course of a comparatively short time realize the power
which lies in them. Often their leaders are men of signal ability, men
who can hold their own in discussion or in action with the ablest and
best-educated men in the community. The labor movement must necessarily
progress. The people\'s thought will take shape in action; and it lies
with us, with you to whom in part the future belongs, to say on what
lines the action is to be expressed; whether it is to be expressed
wisely and temperately, or wildly and intemperately; whether it is to be
expressed on lines of evolution or on lines of revolution. Nothing can
better fit you for taking part in the solution of these problems, than
the study and preeminently the practice of law. Those of you who feel
drawn to that profession may rest assured that you will find in it an
opportunity for usefulness which is probably unequalled. There is a call
upon the legal profession to do a great work for this country.
