# THE LIVING LAW[^22/1]


[^22/1]: An address delivered before the Chicago Bar Association, January 3, 1916.

The history of the United States, since the adoption of the
constitution, covers less than 128 years. Yet in that short period the
American ideal of government has been greatly modified. At first our
ideal was expressed as \"A government of laws and not of men.\" Then it
became \"A government of the people, by the people, for the people.\"\'
Now it is \"Democracy and social justice.\"

In the last half century our democracy has deepened. Coincidentally
there has been a shifting of our longing from legal justice to social
justice, and --- it must be admitted --- also a waning respect for law. Is
there any causal connection between the shifting of our longing from
legal justice to social justice and waning respect for law? If so, was
that result unavoidable?

Many different causes contributed to this waning respect for law. Some
related specifically to the lawyer, some to the courts and some to the
substantive law itself. The lessening of the lawyer\'s influence in the
community came first. James Bryce called attention to this as a fact of
great significance, already a generation ago. Later criticism of the
efficiency of our judicial machinery became widespread. Finally, the law
as administered was challenged --- a challenge which expressed itself
vehemently a few years ago in the demand for recall of judges and of
judicial decisions.

Many different remedies must be applied before the ground lost can be
fully recovered and the domain of law extended further. The causes and
the remedies have received perhaps their most helpful discussion from
three lawyers whom we associate with Chicago: Professor Roscoe Pound,
recently secured for Harvard, who stands preeminently in service in this
connection; Professor Wigmore; and Professor Freund. Another Chicago
Professor, who was not a lawyer but a sociologist, the late Charles R.
Henderson, has aided much by intelligent criticism. No court in America
has in the last generation done such notable pioneer work in removing
the causes of criticism as your own Municipal Court under its
distinguished Chief Justice, Harry Olson. And the American Judicature
Society, under the efficient management of Mr. Herbert Harley, is
stimulating thought and action throughout the country by its
dissemination of what is being done and should be done in aid of the
reform of our judicial system.

The important contribution which Chicago has made in this connection
makes me wish to discuss before you a small part of this large problem.

*The Challenge of Existing Law*. The challenge of existing law is not a
manifestation peculiar to our country or to our time. Sporadic
dissatisfaction has doubtless existed in every country at all times.
Such dissatisfaction has usually been treated by those who govern as
evidencing the unreasonableness of law breakers. The line \"No thief
e\'er felt the halter draw with good opinion of the law,\" expresses the
traditional attitude of those who are apt to regard existing law as
\"the true embodiment of everything that\'s excellent.\" It required the
joint forces of Sir Samuel Romilly and Jeremy Bentham to make clear to a
humane, enlightened and liberty loving England that death was not the
natural and proper punishment for theft. Still another century had to
elapse before social science raised the doubt whether theft was not
perhaps as much the fault of the community as of the individual.

*Earlier Challenges*. In periods of rapid transformation, challenge of
existing law, instead of being sporadic, becomes general. Such was the
case in Athens twenty-four centuries ago, when Euripides burst out in
flaming words against \"the trammelings of law which are not of the
right.\" Such was the case also in Germany during the Reformation, when
Ulrich Zasius declared that \"All sciences have put off their dirty
clothes, only jurisprudence remains in its rags.\"

And after the French Revolution another period of rapid transformation,
another poet-sage, Goethe, imbued with the modern scientific spirit,
added to his protest a clear diagnosis of the disease:

\"Customs and laws, in every place\
Like a disease, an heirloom dread,\
Still trace their curse from race to race,\
And furtively abroad they spread.\
To nonsense, reasons self they turn;\
Beneficence becomes a pest;\
Woe unto thee, thou art a grandson born!\
As for the law, born with us, unexpressed\
That law, alas, none careth to discern.\"

*The Industrial Revolution*. Is not Goethe\'s diagnosis applicable to
the twentieth-century challenge of the law in the United States? Has not
the recent dissatisfaction with our law as administered been due, in
large measure, to the fact that it had not kept pace with the rapid
development of our political, economic and social ideals? In other
words, is not the challenge of legal justice due to its failure to
conform to contemporary conceptions of social justice?

Since the adoption of the federal constitution, and notably within the
last fifty years, we have passed through an economic and social
revolution which affected the life of the people more fundamentally than
any political revolution known to history. Widespread substitution of
machinery for hand labor (thus multiplying a hundredfold man\'s
productivity), and the annihilation of space through steam and
electricity, have wrought changes in the conditions of life which are in
many respects greater than those which had occurred in civilized
countries during thousands of years preceding. The end was put to
legalized human slavery --- an institution which had existed since the
dawn of history. But of vastly greater influence upon the lives of the
great majority of all civilized peoples was the possibility which
invention and discovery created of emancipating women and of liberating
men called free from the excessive toil theretofore required to secure
food, clothing and shelter. Yet, while invention and discovery created
the possibility of releasing men and women from the thraldom of
drudgery, there actually came, with the introduction of the factory
system and the development of the business corporation, new dangers to
liberty. Large publicly owned corporations replaced small privately
owned concerns. Ownership of the instruments of production passed from
the work-man to the employer. Individual personal relations between the
proprietor and his help ceased. The individual contract of service lost
its character, because of the inequality in position between employer
and employee. The group relation of employee to employer with collective
bargaining became common, for it was essential to the workers\'
protection.

*Legal Science Static*. Political as well as economic and social science
noted these revolutionary changes. But legal science --- the unwritten or
judge-made laws as distinguished from legislation --- was largely deaf and
blind to them. Courts continued to ignore newly arisen social needs.
They applied complacently 18th century conceptions of the liberty of the
individual and of the sacredness of private property. Early 19th century
scientific half-truths, like \"The survival of the fittest,\" which
translated into practice meant \"The devil take the hindmost,\" were
erected by judicial sanction into a moral law. Where statutes giving
expression to the new social spirit were clearly constitutional, judges,
imbued with the relentless spirit of individualism, often construed them
away. Where any doubt as to the constitutionality of such statutes could
find lodgment, courts all too frequently declared the acts void. Also in
other countries the strain upon the law has been great during the last
generation, because there also the period has been one of rapid
transformation; and the law has everywhere a tendency to lag behind the
facts of life. But in America the strain became dangerous, because
constitutional limitations were invoked to stop the natural vent of
legislation. In the course of relatively few years hundreds of statutes
which embodied attempts (often very crude) to adjust legal rights to the
demands of social justice were nullified by the courts, on the grounds
that the statutes violated the constitutional guaranties of liberty or
property. Small wonder that there arose a clamor for the recall of
judges and of judicial decisions and that demand was made for amendment
of the constitutions and even for their complete abolition. The assaults
upon courts and constitutions culminated in 1912. They centered about
two decisions: the Lochner case (\[Lochner v. New York, 198 U. S.
45\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=198&page=45){.external-link}),
in which a majority of the judges of the Supreme Court of the United
States had declared void a New York law limiting the hours of labor for
bakers, and the Ives case (Ives v. South Buffalo Ry. Co., 201 N. Y.
271), in which the New York Court of Appeals had unanimously held void
its accident compensation law.

*The Two Ritchie Cases*. Since 1912, the fury against the courts has
abated. This change in the attitude of the public toward the courts is
due not to any modification in judicial tenure, not to amendment of the
constitutions, but to the movement, begun some years prior to 1912,
which has more recently resulted in a better appreciation by the courts
of existing social needs.

In 1895 your Supreme Court held in the first Ritchie case (Ritchie v.
People, 155 Ill. 98) that the eight-hour law for women engaged in
manufacturing was unconstitutional. In 1908 the United States Supreme
Court held in Muller v. Oregon (\[Muller v. Oregon, 208 U. S.
412\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=208&page=412){.external-link})
that the Women\'s Ten-Hour Law was constitutional. In 1910 your Supreme
Court held the same in the second Ritchie case (W. C. Ritchie & Co. v.
Wagman, 244 Ill. 509.) The difference in decision in the two Ritchie
cases was not due to the difference between a ten-hour day and an
eight-hour day, for the Supreme Court of the United States has since
held (as some state courts had held earlier) that an eight-hour law also
was valid; and your Illinois Supreme Court has since sustained a
nine-hour law. In the two Ritchie cases the same broad principles of
constitutional law were applied. In each the right of a legislature to
limit (in the exercise of the police power) both liberty of contract and
use of property was fully recognized. But in the first Ritchie case the
court, reasoning from abstract conception, held a limitation of working
hours to be arbitrary and unreasonable; while in the second Ritchie
case, reasoning from life, it held the limitation of hours not to be
arbitrary and unreasonable. In other words,--- in the second Ritchie case
it took notice of those facts of general knowledge embraced in the
world\'s experience with unrestricted working hours, which the court had
in the earlier case ignored. It considered the evils which had flowed
from unrestricted hours, and the social and industrial benefit which had
attended curtailed working hours. It considered likewise the common
belief in the advisability of so limiting working hours which the
legislatures of many states and countries evidenced. In the light of
this evidence as to the world\'s experience and beliefs, it proved
impossible for reasonable judges to say that the legislature of Illinois
had acted unreasonably and arbitrarily in limiting the hours of labor.

*The Two Night-Work Cases*. Decisions rendered by the Court of Appeals
of New York show even more dearly than do those of Illinois the judicial
awakening to the facts of life.

In 1907, in the Williams case (People v. Williams, 189 N. Y. 131), that
court held that an act prohibiting night work for women was
unconstitutional. In 1915, in the Schweinler case (People v. Charles
Schweinler Press, 214 N. Y. 395) it held that a similar night-work act
was constitutional. And with great clearness and frankness the court set
forth the reason:

\"While theoretically we might \[then\] have been able to take judicial
notice of some of the facts and of some of the legislation now called to
our attention as sustaining the belief and opinion that night work in
factories is widely and substantially injurious to the health of women,
actually very few of these facts were called to our attention, and the
argument to uphold the law on that ground was brief and inconsequential.

\"Especially and necessarily was there lacking evidence of the extent to
which, during the intervening years, the opinion and belief have spread
and strengthened that such night work is injurious to women; of the laws
as indicating such belief, since adopted by several of our own states
and by large European countries, and the report made to the legislature
by its own agency, the factory investigating commission, based on
investigation of actual conditions and the study of scientific and
medical opinion that night work by women in factories is generally
injurious, and ought to be prohibited ...

\"So, as it seems to me, in view of the incomplete manner in which the
important question underlying this statute --- the danger to women of
night work in factories --- was presented to us in the Williams case, we
ought not to regard its decision as any bar to a consideration of the
present statute in the light of all the facts and arguments now
presented to us and many of which are in addition to those formerly
presented, not only as a matter of mere presentation, but because they
have been developed by study and investigation during the years which
have intervened since the Williams decision was made. There is no reason
why we should be reluctant to give effect to new and additional
knowledge upon such a subject as this, even if it did lead us to take a
different view of such a vastly important question as that of public
health or disease than formerly prevailed. Particularly do I feel that
we should give serious consideration and great weight to the fact that
the present legislation is based upon and sustained by an investigation
by the legislature deliberately and carefully made through an agency of
its own creation, the present factory investigating commission.\"

Eight years elapsed between the two decisions. But the change in the
attitude of the court had actually come after the agitation of 1912. As
late as 1911, when the court in the Ives case (Ives v. South Buffalo Ry.
Co., 201 N. Y. 271) held the first accident compensation law void, it
refused to consider the facts of life, saying:

\"The report \[of the commission appointed by the legislature to
consider that subject before legislating\] is based upon a most
voluminous array of statistical tables, extracts from the works of
philosophical writers and the industrial laws of many countries, all of
which are designed to show that our own system of dealing with
industrial accidents is economically, morally, and legally unsound.
Under our form of government, however, courts must regard all economic,
philosophical, and moral theories, attractive and desirable though they
may be, as subordinate to the primary question whether they can be
moulded into statutes without infringing upon the letter or spirit of
our written constitutions. In that respect we are unlike any of the
countries whose industrial laws are referred to as models for our
guidance. Practically all of these countries are so-called
constitutional monarchies in which, as in England, there is no written
constitution, and the Parliament or law-making body is supreme. In our
country the federal and state constitutions are the charters which
demark the extent and the limitations of legislative power; and while it
is true that the rigidity of a written constitution may at times prove
to be a hindrance to the march of progress, yet more often its stability
protects the people against the frequent and violent fluctuations of
that which, for want of a better name, we call 'public opinion.'\"

On the other hand in July, 1915, in the Jensen case (Jensen v. Southern
Pacific Co., (N. Y.), 109 N. E. R. 600), the court, holding valid the
second compensation law (which was enacted after a constitutional
amendment), said:

\"We should consider practical experiences, as well as theory, in
deciding whether a given plan in fact constitutes a taking of property
in violation of the constitution. A compulsory scheme of insurance to
secure injured workmen in hazardous employments and their dependents
from becoming objects of charity certainly promotes the public welfare
as directly as does an insurance of bank depositors from loss.\"

*The Struggle Continues*. The court reawakened to the truth of the old
maxim of the civilians, *Ex facto jus oritur*. It realized that no law,
written or unwritten, can be understood without a full knowledge of the
facts out of which it arises and to which it is to be applied. But the
struggle for the living law has not been fully won. The Lochner case has
not been expressly overruled. Within six weeks the Supreme Judicial
Court of Massachusetts, in supposed obedience to its authority, held
invalid a nine-hour law for certain railroad employees (Commonwealth v.
B. & M. R. R. (Mass.), 110 N. E. R. 264.) The Supreme Court of the
United States, which by many decisions had made possible in other fields
the harmonizing of legal rights with contemporary conceptions of social
justice, showed by its recent decision in the Coppage case (\[Coppage v.
Kansas, 236 U. S.
1\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=236&page=1){.external-link})
the potency of mental prepossessions. Long before it had recognized (see
\[219 U. S.
570\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=219&page=570){.external-link})
that employers \"and their operatives do not stand upon an equality\";
that \"the legislature being familiar with local conditions is primarily
the judge of the necessity of such enactments\" (see \[219 U. S.
569\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=219&page=570){.external-link});
and that unless a \"prohibition is palpably unreasonable and arbitrary
we are not at liberty to say that it passes beyond the limitation of a
state\'s protective authority\" (see \[238 U. S.
452\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=238&page=452){.external-link}.)
And in the application of these principles it had repeatedly upheld
legislation limiting the right of free contract between employer and
employee. But in the Adair case (\[Adair v. United States, 208 U. S.
161\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=208&page=161){.external-link}),
and again in the Coppage case (_supra_.), it declared unconstitutional a
statute which prohibited an employer from requiring as a condition of
his securing or retaining employment that the workman should not be a
member of a labor union. Without considering that Congress or the Kansas
legislature might have had good cause to believe that such prohibition
was essential to the maintenance of trade-unionism, and that
trade-unionism was essential to securing equality between employer and
employee, our Supreme Court of the United States declared that the
enactment of the anti-discrimination law was an arbitrary and
unreasonable interference with the right of contract.

*The Business Men\'s Protest*. The challenge of existing law does not,
however, come only from the working classes. Criticism of the law is
widespread among business men. The tone of their criticism is more
courteous than that of the working classes, and the specific objections
raised by business men are different. Business men do not demand recall
of judges or of judicial decisions. Business men do not ordinarily seek
constitutional amendments. They are more apt to desire repeal of
statutes than enactment. But both business men and working men insist
that courts lack understanding of contemporary industrial conditions.
Both insist that the law is not \"up to date.\" Both insist that the
lack of familiarity with the facts of business life results in erroneous
decisions. In proof of this, business men point to certain decisions
under the Sherman Law, and certain applications of the doctrine of
contracts against public policy --- decisions like the Dr. Miles Medical
Co. case (\[Dr. Miles Medical Co. v. Park & Sons Co., 220 U. S.
409\](http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts/getcase.pl?navby=case&court=us&vol=220&page=409){.external-link}),
in which it is held that manufacturers of a competitive trade-marked
article cannot legally contract with retailers to maintain a standard
selling price for their article, and thus prevent ruinous price cutting.
Both business men and working men have given further evidence of their
distrust of the courts and of lawyers by their efforts to establish
non-legal tribunals or commissions to exercise functions which are
judicial (even where not legal) in their nature, and by their insistence
that the commissions shall be manned with business and working men
instead of lawyers. And business men have been active in devising other
means of escape from the domain of the courts, as is evidenced by the
wide-spread tendency to arbitrate controversies through committees of
business organizations.

*An Inadequate Remedy*. The remedy so sought is not adequate, and may
prove a mischievous one. What we need is not to displace the courts, but
to make them efficient instruments of justice; not to displace the
lawyer, but to fit him for his official or judicial task. And indeed the
task of fitting the lawyer and the judge to perform adequately the
functions of harmonizing law with life is a task far easier of
accomplishment than that of endowing men, who lack legal training, with
the necessary qualifications.

The training of the practicing lawyer is that best adapted to develop
men not only for the exercise of strictly judicial functions, but also
for the exercise of administrative functions quasi-judicial in
character. It breeds a certain virile, compelling quality, which tends
to make the possessor proof against the influence of either fear or
favor. It is this quality to which the prevailing high standard of
honesty among our judges is due. And it is certainly a noteworthy fact
that in spite of the abundant criticism of our judicial system, the
suggestion of dishonesty is rare; and instances of established
dishonesty are extremely few.

*The All-Round Lawyer*. The pursuit of the legal profession involves a
happy combination of the intellectual with the practical life. The
intellectual tends to breadth of view; the practical to that realization
of limitations which are essential to the wise conduct of life. Formerly
the lawyer secured breadth of view largely through wide professional
experience. Being a general practitioner, he was brought into contact
with all phases of contemporary life. His education was not legal only,
because his diversified clientage brought him, by the mere practice of
his profession, an economic and social education. The relative smallness
of the communities tended to make his practice diversified not only in
the character of matters dealt with, but also in the character or
standing of his clients. For the same lawyer was apt to serve at one
time or another both rich and poor, both employer and employee.
Furthermore --- nearly every lawyer of ability took some part in political
life. Our greatest judges, Marshall, Kent, Story, Shaw, had secured this
training. Oliver, in his study of Alexander Hamilton, pictured the value
of such training in public affairs:

\"In the vigor of his youth and at the very summit of hope, he brought
to the study of the law a character already trained and tested by the
realities of life, formed by success, experienced in the facts and
disorders with which the law has to deal. Before he began a study of the
remedies he had a wide knowledge of the conditions of human
society ... With him ... the law was ... a reality, quick, human, buxom and
jolly, and not a formula, pinched, stiff, banded and dusty like a royal
mummy of Egypt.\"

Hamilton was an apostle of the living law.

*The Specialist*. The last fifty years have wrought a great change in
professional life. Industrial development and the consequent growth of
cities have led to a high degree of specialization --- specialization not
only in the nature and class of questions dealt with, but also
specialization in the character of clientage. The term \"corporation
lawyer\" is significant in this connection. The growing intensity of
professional life tended also to discourage participation in public
affairs, and thus the broadening of view which comes from political life
was lost. The deepening of knowledge in certain subjects was purchased
at the cost of vast areas of ignorance and grave danger of resultant
distortion of judgment.

The effect of this contraction of the lawyers' intimate relation to
contemporary life was doubly serious, because it came at a time when the
rapidity of our economic and social transformation made accurate and
broad knowledge of present-day problems essential to the administration
of justice.

The judge came to the bench unequipped with the necessary knowledge of
economic and social science, and his judgment suffered likewise through
lack of equipment in the lawyers who presented the cases to him. For a
judge rarely performs his functions adequately unless the case before
him is adequately presented. Thus were the blind led by the blind. It is
not surprising that under such conditions the laws as administered
failed to meet contemporary economic and social demands.

*The True Remedy*. We are powerless to restore the general practitioner
and general participation in public life. Intense specialization must
continue. But we can correct its distorting effects by broader
education --- by study undertaken preparatory to practice --- and continued
by lawyer and judge throughout life: study of economics and sociology
and politics which embody the facts and present the problems of today.

\"Every beneficent change in legislation,\" Professor Henderson said,
\"comes from a fresh study of social conditions, and social ends, and
from such rejection of obsolete laws to make room for a rule which fits
the new facts. One can hardly escape from the conclusion that a lawyer
who has not studied economics and sociology is very apt to become a
public enemy.\"

Your former townsman, Charles R. Crane, told me once the story of two
men whose lives he would have cared most to have lived. Once was
Bogigish, a native of the ancient city of Ragusa off the coast of
Dalmatia,--- a deep student of law, who after gaining some distinction at
the University of Vienna and in France, became Professor at the
University of Odessa. When Montenegro was admitted to the family of
nations, its Prince concluded that, like other civilized countries, it
must have a code of law. Bogigish\'s fame had reached Montenegro,--- for
Ragusa is but a few miles distant. So the Prince begged the Czar of
Russia to have the learned jurist prepare a code for Montenegro. The
Czar granted the request, and Bogigish undertook the task. But instead
of utilizing his great knowledge of laws to draft a code, he proceeded
to Montenegro, and for two years literally made his home with the
people,--- studying everywhere their customs, their practices, their
needs, their beliefs, their points of view. Then he embodied in law the
life which the Montenegrins lived. They respected that law, because it
expressed the will of the people.
