# Foreword

When every abuse has been hurled and
epithet employed against the Maoists, half-truths
and untruths begin to acquire wings.
They are diagnosed, dissected, and
demonised; the intelligentsia is reluctant to
face facts. Yet we are still compelled to
demystify reality and to answer some
fundamental questions: Why this war? Who
are these people, the "single biggest threat"
to India's internal security? What is their
politics? Why do they justify violence? How
do they perceive their "people's war", their
political goals and themselves? How do they
intend to take a leap from their forest
strongholds into the world outside?

This desire to humanize the demonised and
to get to know the Maoists first hand, i.e.,
not simply through conversations, books,
and documents, but to travel and meet and
to see for myself, had been building up for
many years. Twice I came close to making
the trip. On the first occasion, I was ditched
by two young journalists who failed to show
up at the rendezvous. On the second
occasion, I was unable to prepare myself at
short notice. I was not going to miss out on
this, my third opportunity. Anyways, what
follows is what I --- along with Swedish writer
Jan Myrdal --- saw, heard, read, discussed,
debated, and argued during a fortnight-long
journey in January 2010 in what the CPI
(Maoists) describe as a guerilla zone, where
they run _Janatana Sarkar_ (JS) or their
"people's government". Although the
"guerilla zone" is still an area of contention
and control between the government and
rebels, it is nevertheless an area where the
Indian State has been forced to retreat from
and is using military force to re-establish its
authority.
