The following arguments are not so much a
criticism of the Mondragon Cooperative
Corporation (_MCC_), but a self-criticism of our
cooperative movement. There are two completely
different Mondragons:

* _the real MCC_: a group of enterprises with
  specific experiences and an extremely interesting
  history and development --- all of which should be
  studied very seriously --- and

* _the Mondragon-model_, an ideal construction of
  the international cooperative and self-management
  community, which has hardly any connection to
  reality.

Self-management suffers from the lack of
practical examples throughout the developed
world, as well as from the hostility of capitalist
market ideology. Looking for a successful
example, the cooperative movement found the
Mondragon co-ops, a growing complex of
industrial cooperatives that, surviving the
capitalist crisis, has remained in competitive
markets. So the movement found its model --- the
community of their bible, and their messiah --- Jose
Maria Arizmendiarrieta. A myth was born.

Over the last 20 years, a great many
apologies have been written: Thomas/Logan,
White and White, and the papers of Robert
Oakeshott are among the best known of these.
Aside from some critical details, all of them set
out to construct a beautiful success story about an
"oasis of industrial democracy" and the "largest
movement of producer cooperatives in the world."
Whenever a market liberal criticized self-management, we had our _Mondragon_. Even the
model' s Basque nationalism as one supporting
factor was excused, despite the dangerous
elements it shares with all nationalistic
movements.

I never shared this idealistic construction.
Even before starting to study _MCC_ in 1986, I
supposed that a democratic island in the sea of
capitalism has very limited possibilities. My
interest in self-management arose from a critical
analysis of capitalism, but I never forgot the
strength and determining force of the global
market. The aim of self-management, in the
strongest sense of "auto-determination", can be
achieved only through a radical critical movement
at all levels, including theory and practice, and not
by creating successful models in an idealistic
sense. While there are, on my view, some
possibilities for creating such a radical movement,
Mondragon --- _the real Mondragon_ --- has not
attempted to use or to develop them; rather, it has
systematically diminished them. What makes me
think like this?

1. _MCC_ has never supported the international
   cooperative movement, but is expanding into
   international markets with joint ventures with and
   investments in other capitalistic private
   corporations (e.g., transnationals such as Thomson
   or Alcatel), without any social criteria. _MCC_ has
   opened plants in Morocco, Mexico, and China, not
   as cooperatives, but only to exploit the cheap
   labor in these countries, and without providing
   democratic rights to the employees.
2. _MCC_ has never introduced cooperative issues
   or topics into its education system. Its "industrial
   democracy" is as formal and non-participatory as
   any of our political democracies. Its leading
   managers established a multi-level delegation
   system which prevents real influence by the rank
   and file, even in their own workplaces.
   Mondragon's workplace culture is the same as
   that in any other private firm, with some social
   advantages like a no-layoff policy, and some
   disadvantages, such as the absence of unions.
3. _MCC_ has never used ecological, social, or
   feminist criteria in its development, but has
   subordinated everything to economic productivity
   and profit margins. They have showed no interest
   in working for a better society, but instead have
   cooperated closely with conservative nationalist
   government (the Basque Nationalist Party). While
   it has a big subsidized research center, this has
   done nothing to foster human development, but
   concentrated all its
   resources on individual consumer goods such as
   car components and appliances, and a Tayloristic
   productive technology.
4. _MCC_ sees the cooperative framework not as a
   priority, but as an obstacle to market success and
   in particular to the building of capital stock, an
   obstacle which must be set aside. All of the recent
   reforms of their legal framework point in this anti-cooperative direction, such as the increased
   permission to hire temporary wage earners and to
   sell stock to external shareholders.

I will stop here, though there are many other
critical points to add. I've said enough to indicate
that we need to take an attitude of critical analysis,
rather than of naive apologism or celebration. Self-criticism,
after all, is one of the best left and self-management
traditions, in opposition as well to the
"one best world" idealistic apologists for
capitalism. My criticisms of Mondragon, no doubt,
need to be balanced by examining its positive
experiences, from which we all have much to
learn. But my point is different: the international
cooperative community needs to overcome its lack
of self-criticism. _MCC_'s assimilation to capitalist
practices is not all that recent, but was already
evident in the 1980s, when all the biblical
commentaries on the model community on the
democratic island were being written. Why then
did we not see this, or want to see this? Can we
regain our lost capacity for self-criticism?
