# Fundamental Rights

Part IV of the Constitution deals with the positive obligations of the
State towards its citizens; Part III, which is entitled Fundamental
Rights, deals with its negative obligations. The name itself is a little
old-fashioned and perhaps not very appropriate. Indeed, sometimes it is
very inappropriate. The rule in article 18, incorrectly summarized by
the marginal note as 'abolition of titles', that no title, not being a
military or academic distinction, shall be conferred by the State, is
apparently part of a 'right to equality'. It seems to be no breach of
the right to equality if Sri John Brown becomes Dr John Brown, or
General John Brown, or Pandit John Brown, or Mr Justice Brown or
Rotarian John Brown or even Sri John Brown, M.B.E., or if he rolls
around in a gold-plated car, or loads his wife with jewellery and silk
saris; but if, like the present lecturer, he becomes an impecunious
knight, the right to equality is broken. In whom is this right vested?
It cannot be in Sri John Brown; it is neither _in rem_ nor _in personam_,
neither corporeal nor incorporeal. It is in fact not a right at all, but
a restriction on executive and legislative power.

So, it seems, are all these so-called 'rights', with a few exceptions.
These exceptions are:

1. The rule in article 15 (2) that no citizen shall, on grounds only of
   religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them, be
   subject to any disability, restriction or condition with regard to
   access to shops, public restaurants, and so on, is apparently not a
   restriction on executive and legislative power only, because it is a
   general restriction. It imposes a duty on owners and occupiers and
   vests a corresponding right in a citizen, a right _in rem_, which if
   broken, creates a right _in personam_, enforceable by legal
   proceedings under article 32.
2. The abolition of untouchability by article 17 does not create
   rights. It removes a social disability, but it is not merely a
   restriction on legislative and executive power.
3. Clauses (3) and (4) of article 18, relating to titles conferred by
   foreign States, presents, emoluments, etc., create restrictions on
   public officers which in most States are imposed by administrative
   regulation. Incidentally, their meaning is not at all clear. A
   Companionship of an Imperial Order, such as the Bath or the Star of
   India, is strictly speaking neither a title nor an office. Its
   status is almost exactly the same as, say, a Fellowship of the Royal
   Society or a Fellowship of the Royal College of Surgeons. The only
   difference is that C.B. or C.S.I. is conferred by the Queen, while
   F.R.S. or F.R.C.S. is conferred by a body corporate authorized by
   the Queen.
4. The restrictions on traffic in human beings in article 23 and on
   child labour in article 24 apparently impose duties on private
   persons.

With these exceptions, the so-called Fundamental Rights are restrictions
on legislative, executive and, in a few cases, judicial powers. They are
all liberties allowed by English law. As Dicey pointed out long ago, the
right of public meeting merely means that there are few restrictions on
the liberty of A, B, C, D, etc., to meet together. In other words, there
is no duty imposed on A, B, C, D, etc., not to meet together for a
lawful purpose. What the Indian Constitution seems to do is to prevent
encroachment on this liberty, or in other words not to create
fundamental rights but to protect fundamental liberties.

It is, however, by no means clear that the Constitution does not succeed
in converting the fundamental liberties into fundamental rights, rights
against the State and sometimes, as I have already mentioned, rights
against private persons. If this has happened, it may have happened by
accident, for no clear legal theory peeps out of the provisions of Part
III, and possibly the draftsman had no clear theory in mind. Article 13
is consistent with the traditional theory, that a Bill of Rights is a
restriction on legislative power. To use the English formula, a
legislative Act which is repugnant to the provisions of Part III is, to
the extent of the repugnancy, void and inoperative. Indeed, it would
seem unnecessary to say so, for under the general doctrine of _ultra
vires_ any law which is repugnant to the provisions of the Constitution
is, to the extent of the repugnancy, void and inoperative, and it is
confusing to find a special provision to that effect in Part III.

On the other hand, article 32 may possibly be based on a different
theory. Its interpretation requires the special knowledge and experience
of an Indian lawyer. To one who has not that knowledge and experience,
clause (1) seems very vague. The right to move the Supreme Court by
'appropriate proceedings' is guaranteed: but who has the right and what
are the appropriate proceedings? Clause (2) mentions the writs of _habeas
corpus_, _mandamus_, _prohibition_, _quo warranto_ and _certiorari_. In English
law none of these is available against the Crown, but by article 300 the
Government of India may be sued by the name of the Union State. Does
that mean that the prerogative writs may be brought against what in Part
III is called 'the State'? If so, in whose name is the appropriate
proceeding brought? Also, are other remedies, like the mandatory
injunctions, available, and can they be brought as private actions or
only as relator actions? Possibly there are simple answers to all these
questions, which may have been confused by the peculiar rules of English
administrative law. To an English lawyer, at least, this injection of
Crown Office Practice into a traditional Bill of Rights is confusing,
especially when simultaneously the Crown disappears. The result may be
that fundamental liberties have been converted into fundamental rights
against the State, and occasionally into fundamental rights _in rem_. No
doubt the Supreme Court and the High Courts have already been seised of
this problem.

It would be impossible in a single lecture to examine in detail all the
articles of the Bill of Rights. With some exceptions, they follow common
form. First comes a general proposition; it is followed by specific
applications arising out of that general proposition; then follow
exceptions and qualifications. The scheme is shown in the table below.

+-----------------------+----------------------+----------------------------+
| Proposition           | Applications         | Exceptions                 |
+=======================+======================+============================+
| 14 (equality)         | 15(1), 15(2), 16(1)  | 15(3), 16(3), 16(4), 16(5) |
+-----------------------+----------------------+----------------------------+
| 19(1) (speech, etc.)  | ---                  | 19(2), 19(3)               |
+-----------------------+----------------------+----------------------------+
| 20 (offences)         | ---                  | ---                        |
+-----------------------+----------------------+----------------------------+
| 21 (life and liberty) | 22(1)--(5), 23, 24   | 22(5), 22(6)               |
+-----------------------+----------------------+----------------------------+
| 25(1) (religion)      | 26, 27, 28(1), 28(3) | 25(2), 28(2)               |
+-----------------------+----------------------+----------------------------+
| 31(1) (property)      | 31(2)--(4)           | 31(5)[^31-5-note]          |
+-----------------------+----------------------+----------------------------+

[^31-5-note]: The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, added two further exceptions in articles 31A and 31B.

The general propositions differ somewhat in their character. Articles 21
and 31 (1) seem to be mere applications of the common law rule, which is
presumably part of the law of India, that an act is lawful until it is
declared unlawful. No person can be deprived of life, liberty or
property except by law. The omission of the pursuit of happiness is
perhaps significant of a difference between the American way of life and
the Indian way of life: but the omission has no effect whatsoever,
because it is as true in India as in the United States that one can
pursue happiness, or even unhappiness, in one's own way so long as one
does not break the law. It is equally true that one can pursue
butterflies, or knowledge, or fame. These general propositions suggest
that among the Statutes of the University of Madras should be the
general proposition: 'No person shall be failed in an examination if he
has passed'; or even the obverse: 'No person shall be passed in an
examination if he has failed.' What the American Bill of Rights was
aiming at was the series of prerogative powers claimed by the Stuarts[^house-of-stuart]
and the French kings: but no such powers are claimed in India.

[^house-of-stuart]: The House of Stuart, originally spelt Stewart, was a royal house of Scotland, England, Ireland and later Great Britain. The family name comes from the office of High Steward of Scotland, which had been held by the family progenitor Walter fitz Alan.

Provisions of this character are quite appropriate in a Constitution
which is regarded as the foundation of law. If one were codifying the
whole of the law one might begin with general propositions like the
axioms of Euclid. For example:

1. Every act is either lawful or unlawful.
2. No act is unlawful unless it is declared unlawful by positive law.

Where the common law system operates, though, it is as unnecessary to
insert these general propositions as it is to provide in the
Interpretation Act that unless the context otherwise requires, a
straight line shall be the shortest distance between two points' or
'unless the context otherwise requires, two plus two shall equal four'.

Articles 14, 19 (1), and 25 (1) are different because they impose
limitations on legislative power. It is, however, very doubtful whether
article 14 contains anything that is not in article 15 (1). 'Equality
before the law' cannot mean that every person shall be treated alike,
though exactly what it does mean is bound to be the subject of much
judicial argument. Article 15 (1) says that there shall be no
discrimination on grounds _only_ of religion, race, caste, sex, place of
birth or any of them. It seems to follow that there may be
discrimination on other grounds, as for instance between citizens and
aliens, or according to trade or profession, or on the ground of place
of residence. Nothing is said about discrimination on the ground of
language, while there is a prohibition against discrimination on the
ground of race. This is rather odd, because we know that all the
so-called 'races' of India are in fact language-groups.

Indeed, article 14 is a good example of the dangers which arise from the
type of Bill of Rights selected by the Constituent Assembly. It contains
a general proposition about equality before the law: article 15 (1)
forbids inequality among certain classes of persons and article 16
forbids inequality in respect of certain types of legislation. Thus, the
courts are faced with the problem whether a type of discrimination not
covered by article 16 is discrimination within the meaning of article 15
or whether the classes of persons not covered by article 15 are covered
by article 14. If both questions are answered in the affirmative,
sections 15 and 16 are quite unnecessary; but, since nobody is allowed
to assume that two sections of a Constitution are mere verbiage, they
must mean something, and what may possibly be read into the Constitution
is that article 14 does not mean what it says. The position would have
been quite plain if the draftsman's usual escape clause had been used:
'Without prejudice to the generality of article 14 ...' Every lawyer
knows that politicians, like playwrights, have to 'tickle the ears of
the groundlings' by putting into laws propositions which need not be
asserted because they are law already, but which have to be specifically
asserted because public opinion demands express enactment.

Nor is article 16 (1), which provides for 'equality of opportunity' in
the public service, very happily phrased, for it is very difficult to
know what it means. To reach the highest branch of the public service in
India, or elsewhere, it is necessary to secure primary education,
secondary education, and higher education. Can a poor peasant in the
State of Madras secure an injunction against the Federal Public Service
Commission because there is no school in his village and therefore he
has been denied equality of opportunity? If it does not mean that, what
does it mean? These vague political aspirations do no harm when they
become Directive Principles of State Policy: but this is a rule of law.

Article 19 is full of what an English lawyer might call 'hidden traps'.
The right to freedom of speech and expression may be taken as an
example. It must be read subject to article 19 (2) which said, as
originally enacted, that the existence of this right should not prevent
the State from making any law relating to libel, slander, defamation,
contempt of court or any matter which offended against decency or
morality or which undermined the security of, or tended to overthrow,
the State. The weaknesses of that formula have already been exposed
during the debate on the constitutional amendments. As the clause was
originally drafted, the most obvious weakness was the omission of power
to legislate against what may be called scandalizing religion. Remarks
derogatory to the Buddha or the Prophet Muhammad, for instance, would be
strongly resented without its being possible to hold that they offended
against 'decency or morality' or undermined the security of the State.
The words 'decency and morality', indeed, are as full of holes as a
crumpet. If morality means moral philosophy my learned friends in India
must all become philosophers. Presumably, though, 'decency or morality'
has a popular meaning and therefore has something to do with sex.

The amended clause is an improvement. Article 19 (1) does not prevent
the State from making any law, 'in so far as such law imposes reasonable
restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said
sub-clause in the interests of the security of the State, friendly
relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in
relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence.
The differences between the present formulation and that of the original
clause exhibit the defects of that original clause. The agitation
against the amendment, too, bore witness to a defect in Bills of Rights
generally. The amendment does not impose any restrictions on anybody; it
merely authorizes restrictions. Now, the question whether a restriction
is good or bad depends on the restriction, not on the power to impose a
restriction. Except in respect of the law of libel, which is probably
too strict, and which was created not by Parliament but by the courts,
English law is one of the most liberal systems in the world; and yet the
Parliament of the United Kingdom has complete power to impose
restrictions. Similarly, if the Legislatures of India were given
complete power it would not necessarily follow that there would be a
police State, or a controlled press, or a censorship of ideas. The
agitation seemed to assume that a power to impose restrictions would
result in those restrictions; and it is very possible that a large
section of the population, as well as people outside, thought that the
Union Government was proposing something undemocratic.

This is of course the result of trying to formulate Fundamental Rights.
If the Constitution allows a press reporter to turn himself into a
public nuisance, he has, it is thought, a right to be a public nuisance;
whereas, when it comes to the point, nobody desires that he be allowed
to be a public nuisance. Eventually it was agreed to insert the word
'reasonable'. Now that is exactly what is wanted. If liberty becomes
unreasonable it becomes licence. So long as this is a well-understood
political principle, politicians as well as public opinion can make
certain that unreasonable restrictions be not imposed. But when the
so-called right becomes a _rule of law_, what is 'reasonable' has to be
determined by law. A piece of legislation may be challenged not only
through the normal democratic process but also through legal process.

It is said to be a popular toast in Lincoln's Inn, where the Chancery
lawyers congregate, 'Here's to the man who makes his own will.' If
constitutional lawyers had an Inn of their own they would drink to the
man who inserts 'reasonable' into a Bill of Rights. In article 19 the
word now appears five times. Indian constitutional lawyers should
therefore raise a bumper --- though in Madras State it will have to be
filled with prohibition liquor --- to the draftsman of article 19.
'Reason' used to be synonymous with 'equity', and equity, according to
Selden, varied with the length of the Chancellor's foot. In the modern
world, where constitutional litigation has become so expensive, the
simile is not sufficiently apt. It varies not only with the length of
the judge's foot but also with the depth of the plaintiff's purse or the
length of his waistband. Everything is unreasonable until it has been
pronounced to be reasonable by the highest possible Court.

Some allowance must be made for the prejudices of an English lawyer, who
is apt to shy away from a general proposition like a horse from a ghost.
English law was built up from a multitude of individual instances,
arising over hundreds of years. Every phrase in it is redolent of
forensic history. In other systems more merit is accorded to
generalities; but those systems also accord more merit to juristic
analysis than to judicial pronouncements. In the English system, which
India has inherited, a general proposition or a generic or vague word is
an invitation to litigation. Even more fruitful of lawyers' fees is a
general proposition followed by a generic exception, such as article 19
exhibits. Such an arrangement trebles the difficulty of interpretation.
It is necessary to interpret each generality not only in relation to its
own language but also in relation to the others. When the Ceylon
Ministers were instructed under the Colonial Government to give certain
discretionary powers to the Governor, they gave him the powers in
general language, created exceptions in general language, added
exceptions to the exceptions, and then vested the power of interpreting
these clauses in the Supreme Court. Their draftsman made the cynical
remark, off the record, that if that did not stop the Governor from
exercising the powers nothing would.

There are times when the Bill of Rights in the United States
Constitution protects the poor and the lowly, though usually only when
some national organization provides the funds for expensive litigation.
More often it is used by vested interests to protect their anti-social
behaviour. One ought not to judge a Bill of Rights by the litigation it
causes, because it may often have prevented undesirable legislation from
being passed. Even so, it may be doubted whether the United States would
not have prospered more, in a moral as well as a material sense, if it
had not had to carry the Constitution on its shoulders. Compared with
the Indian Bill of Rights, though, the American Bill of Rights is a
marvel of clarity and conciseness. What the Fathers of the American
Constitution did, though it is by no means clear that they knew what
they were doing, was to trust their judges to protect their liberties by
applying a few simple fundamental propositions. In India the Constituent
Assembly did not trust the judges so far. It tried to formulate not
merely the general principles but also some of the details. The Indian
Bill of Rights is based on no consistent philosophy. A thread of Dicey's
nineteenth century liberalism runs through it; there are consequences of
the political problems of Britain in it; there are relics of the
Congress experience in opposition to British rule; and there is evidence
of a desire to reform some of the social institutions which time and
circumstance have developed in India. The result is a series of complex
formulae, in 26 articles, some of them lengthy, which must become the
basis of a vast and complicated case law. The most lucrative profession
in India promises to be that of a constitutional lawyer.

One result of having a Bill of Rights is that provision has to be
inserted to suspend it. It is true that article 358 does no more than
authorize the suspension of article 19. Article 359 authorizes the
suspension of constitutional remedies, but what it means is not at all
clear. A legislative enactment which is void under the Bill of Rights is
presumably void even while a Proclamation of Emergency is in force,
unless it would otherwise be void under article 19. A person who wishes
to challenge the validity of the enactment does not need a
constitutional remedy: all he needs to do is to ignore the enactment and
to resist any attempt to enforce it. If he is arrested for breach of the
law he cannot take out _habeas corpus_, but he cannot be convicted of an
offence because article 20 will be in force, and he must be produced
before a magistrate within twenty-four hours under article 22, unless
legislation providing for preventive detention is in force. The duty of
the magistrate, clearly, will be to set him free, for he has been
arrested for failure to conform with an enactment which is not in force.
Thus, constitutional questions will be decided not by the Supreme Court
under article 32 but by magistrates under article 22. Further, if a
person suffers damage through the action of a public authority under a
legislative enactment which is invalid, he presumably has a _cause of
action_ against that authority. Certainly he would have such a remedy in
English law, provided only that the damage does not result only from a
failure of duty towards the public.

These provisions seem to be another relic of Dicey. Dicey expounds some
of the liberties provided by article 19. He then lays emphasis on _habeas
corpus_ --- and the Constitution correctly extends this emphasis to the
other _prerogative writs_ --- and the old practice of suspending the _writ_.
Finally he discusses 'martial law', which is really a temporary
suspension of constitutional remedies. The Indian Constitution, however,
contains a great many restrictions on legislative powers which are not
mentioned by Dicey and to which the _prerogative writs_ have little
relevance, if any. It therefore leaves open the whole question of the
protection of fundamental liberties, or the preservation of fundamental
rights, by measures other than the _prerogative writs_.

It is necessary to remember once more that these remarks come from an
English lawyer, who has been trained to distrust general propositions.
The greatness of English law, like the greatness of Roman law in its
golden age, is due to its being built up from individual decisions. The
statute law therefore goes into a multiplicity of detail, like the
common law. Judicial administration does help to protect fundamental
liberties because the judges never hesitate to express an opinion in no
uncertain terms. Recently a village Hampden refused to show his identity
card for a purpose which he deemed improper. The justices found the case
against him proved, but thought that he was morally justified in
refusing and therefore discharged him. In due course the case went to
the House of Lords, which congratulated the justices not only on their
decision that he had acted unlawfully, but also on their decision to
discharge the accused. Their Lordships expressed their view in no
uncertain terms that a power conferred for security reasons ought not to
be used for other purposes, and it is reasonably certain that never
again will the police exercise the power which is quite clearly vested
in them.

Generally speaking, though, fundamental liberties are protected not by
law but by public opinion. The constitutional liberties of the American
Bill of Rights are taken from English law. In Britain they can be taken
away by Act of Parliament, whereas in the United States they can be
taken away only by constitutional amendment. Yet it is generally agreed
that these same liberties are better protected in Britain than in the
United States because there is a better organized and more forceful
public opinion. The difficulty of organizing public opinion in a country
so vast as the United States must readily be admitted. The difficulty in
India must necessarily be even greater, but it may reasonably be asked
whether India will not lose more than it gains from this complex Bill of
Rights.

The real difficulty is that the problems of life and society are
infinitely variable. A draftsman thinks of the problems that he can
foresee, but he sees through a glass, darkly. He cannot know what
problems will arise in ten, twenty, fifty or a hundred years. Any
restriction on legislative power may do harm, because the effect of that
restriction in new conditions cannot be foreseen. It is a useful
principle that one should never trust politicians; but it is equally
true that in the context of the future one should never trust
constitutional lawyers. On the whole the politician of tomorrow is more
likely to be right than the constitutional lawyer of today. A
Constituent Assembly has to effect a difficult compromise. On the whole,
though, it is wise for the constitutional lawyer to be modest, to frame
a simple system of government, and to hope that the future will be able
to take care of itself.

It has to be noted, too, that every Constituent Assembly has to take
decisions in a hurry. It cannot adjourn while the constitutional lawyers
work out their fundamental problems. It has to take rapid decisions.
This again leads to the conclusion that a Constitution ought to be as
short and as simple as possible, but it also leads to the conclusion
that every Constitution will be an imperfect instrument.
