# Introduction

This booklet contains the text, in expanded form, of three lectures
delivered in the University of Madras in March 1952, in accordance with
the terms of the Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Aiyer Endowment. It was of
course impossible in three lectures to do justice to so vast a subject
as the Indian Constitution. All that could be done was to examine some
of its peculiarities. Inevitably this produced an unbalanced survey, for
many of the characteristics had to be omitted. A balanced survey would
emphasize the following characteristics:

1. The Constitution is lengthy, detailed and rigid; indeed the length
   and the degree of detail add considerably to its rigidity. This
   problem was examined in the first lecture, which has become Section
   II of this booklet.
2. It contains both a Bill of Rights and a series of Directive
   Principles of State Policy. The former is detailed, and there are
   special rules for enforcing Fundamental Rights. These matters were
   dealt with in the second lecture, which has become Sections III and
   IV of this booklet.
3. India has a federation with a strong centralizing tendency; the
   Constitution contains not merely the Constitution of the Union of
   India but also Constitutions for the States, which are placed under
   federal control. This is a vast subject, worthy not of a single
   lecture but of a whole course of lectures. It had nevertheless to be
   compressed into one lecture, which in this booklet has become
   Section V. Two paragraphs at the end have, however, been expanded
   into a Section VI. Even so, these sections are by no means
   comprehensive.
4. Both in the Union and in the States, the principle of responsible
   government has been accepted. The President in the Union, or the
   Governor or _Rajpramukh_ in a State, is essentially a constitutional
   monarch. The machinery of government is essentially British and the
   whole collection of British constitutional conventions has
   apparently been incorporated as conventions. The word 'apparently'
   has to be used because only past history and not the provisions of
   the Constitution prevents the President, the Governor or the
   _Rajpramukh_, as the case may be, from exercising the vast powers
   which are legally vested in him. No doubt any such exercise would
   bring him into conflict with his Ministry and ultimately some _modus
   vivendi_[^modus-vivendi] would be needed. Nevertheless, it need not be that which has
   been adopted in the United Kingdom and copied in Canada, Australia,
   New Zealand, South Africa and Ceylon. This subject is an interesting
   one, but of necessity it had to be omitted from the lectures. Its
   absence from this booklet will help to explain the selective nature
   of the subject-matter. The lectures deal with the characteristics
   which the lecturer found most interesting, not with characteristics
   in general.

[^modus-vivendi]: A way of living, especially a working arrangement to allow for peaceful coexistence between two parties in spite of differences or unresolved disputes.

The peculiarity of the English constitutional lawyer is his emphasis
upon institutions rather than on legal principles. His way to achieve
democracy is to establish democratic institutions. England has never had
a revolution like the French Revolution which compelled the
establishment of a new constitutional foundation. Charles II was
presumed in 1660 to have succeeded on the death of his father in 1648;
William and Mary replaced James II with only the explicit changes of the
Bill of Rights; George I succeeded Anne under the Act of Settlement. The
law has gradually been moulded to meet changing conditions, but its
foundation has always been the common law. The English lawyer thinks of
democracy not in terms of fundamental legal principles, but in terms of
the franchise, the delimitation of constituencies, election law, the
qualifications and disqualifications of Members of Parliament,
responsible government, constitutional monarchy, and so on. He has never
tried to express, and does not think of expressing, the fundamental
ideas which are implicit in his Constitution.

India has inherited the same tradition. Generally speaking, the Indian
Constitution seeks to establish democratic institutions, not to express
democratic ideas as legal principles. Indeed, its detail and
complication are due in large measure to an anxiety to regulate by the
Constitution itself political institutions which other countries in the
British tradition have regulated by ordinary law. In such a context
Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy are
incongruous. As the lectures emphasized even more definitely than the
text indicates, an English lawyer shies away from them. He does not like
Fundamental Rights: he prefers to establish a Government which will
govern wisely and well and to hope for a vocal, active and virile public
opinion which will ensure that liberty shall prevail without
bureaucratic tyranny on the one hand and licence on the other. This
dislike of general principles, which lawyers in many countries do not
share, must be taken into consideration by those who read these
lectures, as they were stressed to those who listened to them.

In a discussion in which Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Aiyer himself took
part, it was suggested that the lecturer had not laid sufficient
emphasis on the environment in which the Constitution had to be drafted.
The text shows that the subject was not ignored. It is nevertheless true
that a systematic exposition of the Indian Constitution would require a
discussion of the relations between the United Kingdom and India since
1917, or even earlier. It would not suffice to give a summary of the
efforts to reach agreement. The problem is to study the emotions with
which the atmosphere was charged while the Constitution was under
consideration. India's heritage from British rule was not merely a
collection of British ideas and institutions; it was also a complex of
emotions derived from a long political conflict in which many of the
Indian leaders had suffered both in body and in mind.

It is unlikely that a judicious history of this conflict can at present
be written by anybody. Seen from Ceylon it had the essential
characteristics of a Greek tragedy in which, from the moment when the
actors appear on the stage, an unpleasant last act appears inevitable.
The last act was not in fact as unpleasant as it might have been; but
the partition of India and the conflicts which have arisen since, though
far less important than many people had prophesied, have at least shown
that the problem was by no means simple. What is wanted, though, is not
so much a judgement on the centuries of British rule as a cautious
analysis of the environment as it prevailed in 1947, for that
environment is the explanation of much that is to be found in the Indian
Constitution. If the lectures give inadequate attention to that
environment, which is very probable, the explanation is that the
lecturer is not qualified to express opinions of value. His visits to
India have consisted of quick dashes to various universities, with quick
dashes back to take up as soon as possible the urgent problems which
Ceylon presented.

To generalize on the basis of such inadequate experience is dangerous.
It would seem, though, that the principal relics of British rule were,
in the first place, an admiration for, or at least an acquiescence in,
the essential principles of British democracy and what Dicey called the
Rule of Law; in the second place, though, there was a suspicion of
governmental authority going much further than the normal Englishman's
normal refusal to be 'pushed around' by bureaucrats. Before 1947 few
Indians had the opportunity to say to the jack-in-office '\'Oo the 'ell
d'you think you are?'. In Britain the official is frightened of the
People with a capital P. In India the official represented Power with a
capital P. The result in the Indian Constitution is a suspicion of the
powers of government which will certainly prove embarrassing.

Sir Alladi correctly pointed out that the use of Fundamental Liberties
was really determined by the arrangement under which the Constituent
Assembly for undivided India was set up, and that when once the
appropriate committee was functioning it was inevitable that a Bill of
Rights should be inserted. On the other hand, it is wise not to use too
much imagination in discussing British policy. The members of the Home
Civil Service are much like the Indian members of the former Indian
Civil Service. India was a Problem with a capital P, a Problem for which
civil servants had to propose solutions that would not raise
unanswerable questions in the House of Commons. After 1939 the Problem
was to get rid of the Problem; and the opinion of the Indian National
Congress that the problem of minorities could be met by a Bill of Rights
was a gift to the civil servant. It offered the line of retreat for
which Ministers were looking. We are back to the Greek tragedy: a Bill
of Rights is not necessarily good because it is inevitable.

The function of a university lecturer is to make people argue, for by
argument they reach understanding. These lectures fulfilled this
purpose; but that was due as much to the audience as to the lecturer. It
was a very responsive audience. Never once did it fail to take a point;
never once, therefore, was it necessary --- as it usually is --- to make the
same point again in order to drive it. home. The process of lecturing
was truly enjoyable, for a lecturer who has an appreciative audience is
like a craftsman who produces an article which others think to be
beautiful. The lectures are now being published, even in this crude
condition, in the hope that the argument will continue.

The purpose of the lectures was to give an appreciation of part of the
work of the Constituent Assembly. The text used was that approved by the
Assembly. Notes have now been added to bring in the amendments made by
the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951. No attempt has been made
to take account of judicial interpretation: that is a field into which
an English lawyer resident in Ceylon dare not venture.
