# Indian Federalism

It may be stated as a general proposition that nobody would have a
federal Constitution if he could possibly avoid it. That great lawyer,
Lord de Villiers, was right to draw the conclusion from the experience
of the United States, Canada and Australia, that South Africa ought to
avoid federalism if it was at all possible to do so. It seems doubtful
whether India could have avoided it. The huge bureaucracy which British
rule had left behind would have been even more cautious, and the machine
would have worked with even greater delay and friction, if there had
been no devolution to the States. One cannot justly criticize the
Constituent Assembly for a complication which it could not avoid; nor
can one criticize the general principle adopted by the Assembly, that in
spite of federalism the national interest ought to be paramount. In
spite of the great differences in racial stock, language, climate and
social organization, the States are less differentiated than a
superficial view would seem to indicate.

It is, however, not easy to seise the essential characteristics of
Indian federalism. Here, as elsewhere, the Constitution is exceedingly
complicated. The foundations of the federal system were laid in the
Government of India Act, 1935. It is therefore essential to remember
that that Act was not intended only to create a Constitution. Its
primary purpose was to transfer power, subject to limitations and
qualifications, from British to Indian hands. There was no need to
discuss whether a provision was constitutional or administrative in its
degree of importance. The real question was whether a power was to be in
British or Indian hands and, if the hands were to be Indian, whether
they were to be tied closely or left comparatively free. The Act of 1935
was therefore a bad precedent for the Constitution of an independent
country. On the other hand, it had provided a working machine in the
Provinces of British India, and it was impossible to start afresh when
the Provinces became States. All Constitutions are the heirs of the past
as well as the testators of the future. To use the language of
Roman--Dutch law, every generation is bound by _fideicommissa_[^fideicommissa].

[^fideicommissa]. A fideicommissum is a type of bequest in which the beneficiary is encumbered to convey parts of the decedent's estate to someone else. For example, if a father leaves the family house to his firstborn, on condition that she will it to her first child.

We may note first that, whereas the United States and Australia left the
existing State Constitutions standing, subject to the federal
Constitution, India like Canada enacted the State Constitutions in the
federal Constitution. Unlike the Provinces of Canada, however, the
States have no independent powers of constitutional amendment. Even a
decision to abolish the Legislative Council requires an Act of the Union
Parliament (article 169). Most other changes can be effected only by
constitutional amendment. What is more, the State Constitutions in Part
VI are expressed in considerable detail, occupying 86 articles. An
excessive rigidity has thus been given to State government. There is no
reason for supposing that all State institutions must be weak
reproductions of Union institutions, like second rainbows. Similarly
India would gain if they were allowed to experiment with constitutional
forms. The resources of political science were not exhausted by Bryce
and Dicey, the two writers whose influence in this Constitution has been
most evident.

Part VI does not, however, contain all the principles of federalism, for
the relations between the Union and the States are governed by Part XI,
finance is regulated by Part XII, and trade and commerce by Part XIII.

The division of legislative power is governed by article 246 and the
Seventh Schedule. It follows with quite close fidelity the method
adopted in the Government of India Act, 1935, which broke away from the
traditional system. The usual practice, as evidenced by the United
States and Australia, has been to confer specific functions on the
federal Legislature and to leave the residue to the States. Canada has
two lists, one of Dominion powers and one of Provincial powers, with the
residue in the Dominion. That residue is, however, of little importance,
because some of the enumerated heads are so wide, as for instance
'property and civil rights within the Province', that there is very
little to fall into residue. The more important characteristic of the
Canadian distribution is that the two lists of powers have to be read
together, the interpretation of the one depending on the interpretation
of the other.

The lists in the United States, Canada and Australia have, however, one
characteristic in common. The separate items are large and
comprehensive, so that the number of such separate items is
comparatively small. The Act of 1935 followed a different principle. It
sought to specify in considerable detail the field of legislation, to
itemize the several subjects of government on which law may be
anticipated. The scheme seems to have been a success for the
comparatively short period during which it has been in operation. This
is not a perfect test because, though it is easy to foresee what will be
the main subjects of legislation in the next ten years, it is impossible
to guess what they will be in a hundred years' time. In the Act of 1935
this did not matter. It was merely an interim Constitution designed to
cover the transition to independence, and it could always be amended by
the Act of the United Kingdom Parliament. The Indian Constitution, on
the one hand, is a permanent formulation, and the provisions relating to
the distribution of legislative powers are, under article 368,
particularly difficult to amend. The experience of other federations has
been that to secure substantial agreement on amendment is always
difficult because there are so many vested interests in the _status quo_.
In Australia, for instance, amendment can be effected by a majority of
votes in the Commonwealth and in the majority of States. Even a
Government which normally has the support of those majorities cannot,
however, get amendments made. The Opposition is opposed to a proposal
because it is produced by the Government even though it would be very
willing to accept the amendment if it were in power. It objects not
because it considers the power to be unnecessary but because it does not
like the people who will exercise it. On the other hand every vested
interest which fears that adverse legislation may be passed against it,
either by the present Government or by some future Government, also
votes and canvasses against. It is, however, easier where the assent of
a parliamentary majority only has to be obtained, because party
'discipline' then operates. Nevertheless the requirement of a two-thirds
majority in each House, plus a majority of the States, is a most
difficult one to satisfy.

Even so, it seems probable that India has adopted the right principle.
There may be much litigation at a later stage, when the subjects of
government have altered: but an attempt to describe the field of
legislation in large, general terms, would have caused litigation
immediately. What is more, experience in other countries suggests that
the principles of interpretation vary with the composition of the court
and the social context in which the cases arise. It may not be true, as
Mr Dooley said, that 'the Supreme Court follows the election returns':
but it is certainly true that the principles applied in interpreting the
Constitution of the United States have varied from generation to
generation. The shorter experience of Canada permits the same
generalization, while in Australia there was a fundamental change in
1920, though recently there has been a tendency to revert to earlier
ideas. Something is gained if excessive litigation can be avoided at the
outset, and it must be remembered that even the prospect of litigation
hampers the discretion of the Legislature. The future has to take care
of itself because nobody knows what its needs will be.

In India there are three lists, the Union List, the Concurrent List and
the State List. This necessarily makes interpretation difficult, but
generally speaking the lists are so detailed that the majority of cases
will be covered by express words. The language of article 246 shows that
the first question to be asked is whether a subject falls within the
Union List, the second whether it falls within the Concurrent List, and
the third whether it falls within the State List. In accordance with
article 248, the residuary power is in the Union. Further, by article
254, in the event of repugnancy between a law made by a State
Legislature and a law made by the Parliament of the Union, the latter
shall prevail, subject to the qualification that, if the law deals with
a subject-matter in the Concurrent List, a later law of a State
Legislature will prevail over an earlier law of the Union Parliament if
the former was reserved for the President's consideration and has
received his assent. Some authorities consider that this article applies
only to subjects in the Concurrent List, but it is not so phrased. It
makes sense if all references to the Concurrent List be deleted, thus:

> If any provision of a law made by the Legislature of a State is
> repugnant to any provision of a law made by Parliament which
> Parliament is competent to enact ... the law made by Parliament ...
> shall prevail and the law made by the Legislature of the State shall,
> to the extent of the repugnancy, be void.

The question is important because, as the experience of Canada has
shown, a law made by a State dealing with a subject-matter in the State
List may be repugnant to a law made by the Union dealing with a
subject-matter in the Union List. For instance, a law relating to
fisheries may deal incidentally with the navigation of fishing vessels,
though navigation is an exclusively Union function.

Speaking generally, the subjects have been very precisely formulated so
as to lead to a minimum of controversy and litigation, at least at the
early stage while the environment and the problems of 1948 are
maintained. Perhaps the vaguest phrase in the Seventh Schedule is
'economic and social planning' in the Concurrent List. Planning is part
of the current political cant, and so whenever a politician, in any
country, puts up a proposal he calls it a 'Plan', and the proposals put
up individually by Ministers and approved collectively by the Cabinet
are called a 'National Plan'. Anything done by a democratic Government
is therefore 'economic and social planning', just as any action taken by
a small communist minority is regarded by Communists as 'mass action'.
Of course, the courts will have to say whether legislation falls within
'economic and social planning'; but, until they have laid down some
principles, the phrase is as vague as, say, 'the pursuit of happiness'.

The subordinate position of the States is witnessed by many of the
provisions of the Seventh Schedule. Indeed, it is somewhat remarkable
that the Constituent Assembly maintained the strictly federal principle
at all. It would be easy to give defined powers to the States and
sovereign powers to the Union, subject only to the Constitution. All
legislation by the Union would then be valid, provided that it did not
infringe the Bill of Rights or other constitutional provisions, while
State legislation within the powers of the State would be valid unless
it was repugnant to Union legislation. The difference in substance would
not be very great, but litigation would be rendered less likely.
Federalism is justified only where a minority has to be protected by
giving it exclusive powers over its own culture, as in French Canada.
There is no longer justification for it in such a country as the United
States or Australia. Evidently the Constituent Assembly thought there
was little justification in India. That opinion might possibly be
contested, especially here in South India, but having gone so far in the
direction of a unitary Constitution, it is surprising that it did not go
further. Incidentally, this Constitution ought to destroy the theory,
sometimes expressed in Madras, that Ceylon will one day return to Mother
India. Whether it would do so in any case is very doubtful: it is
evident that it would never be in its interest to do so under a
Constitution which vests control in the Hindus of the north and provides
no adequate protection for minorities.

Indeed, the almost complete disregard of minority claims is one of the
most remarkable features of Indian federalism. The existence of
competing claims on religious and ethnic grounds was one of the reasons
given for the refusal of Indian independence before 1940. By reaction
the Congress politicians, who were above all else nationalists, tended
to minimize the importance of minority interests and their emotions.
History will probably tell us that this soft-pedalling of communal
claims was one of the reasons for the creation of Pakistan as an
independent State. What effect it will have on the Constitution cannot
be estimated, because it depends essentially on the way in which
majorities exercise their power. Countries with divided loyalties are
always on the horns of a dilemma. To compromise with communal claims may
be the height of statesmanship because it enables the majority to secure
the support of the minorities. To recognize communal claims, on the
other hand, is to strengthen communalism. The Constituent Assembly has
decided to ignore communalism.. If this bold step succeeds history will
record it as. a decision of the highest statesmanship; if it fails,
history will call it another case of political blindness.

There are two articles, 249 and 250, authorizing the Union Parliament to
trench upon the State List. Article 249 requires a resolution passed by
two-thirds of the Council of States present and voting that it is
necessary or expedient in the national interest that Parliament should
make laws 'with respect to any matter enumerated in the State List
specified in the resolution'. The resolution cannot remain in force for
more than one year, unless renewed, and the legislation will cease to
have effect six months after the resolution ceases to be in force.
Article 250 gives a similar power while a Proclamation of Emergency is
in force. Article 251 then provides for cases of repugnancy on the same
lines as article 254. So long as there is both Union legislation and
State legislation in the field the former shall prevail to the extent of
the repugnancy.

Finally, article 253 empowers the Union Parliament to pass legislation
implementing any treaty, agreement or convention with another country
'or any decision made at any international conference, association or
other body'. This last phrase is remarkably vague. It does not
specifically refer to conferences, associations and other bodies
representing Governments, and on its face it would seem to apply to any
international organization representing, let us say, universities or
trade unions. Nor would it seem to matter that the organization had
merely advisory powers. The word 'decision' cannot mean a binding
decision, for the assumption is that legislation is needed to implement
it. If this is the correct interpretation the Union Parliament can
acquire jurisdiction over university education by the simple process of
a decision of the Inter-University Board of India, which is an
international body because it contains representatives of universities
in Burma and Ceylon. One notes, too, that the Cominform[^cominform] and the Fourth
International[^fourth-international] are international bodies. This is such a startling
invasion of States' rights, thrown in casually by a few words at the end
of an article, that one doubts its correctness. Possibly a court would
hold that 'international implied a governmental organization, that it
applied to 'association' and 'body' as well as 'conference and that
'body' had to be read _ejusdem generis_[^ejusdem-generis].

[^cominform]: Cominform
The Information Bureau of the Communist and Workers' Parties, commonly known as Cominform a coordination body of Marxist-Leninist communist parties in Europe during the early Cold War, formed in part as a replacement of the Communist International. Cominform was dissolved during de-Stalinization in 1956.

[^fourth-international]: Fourth International
The Fourth International is a revolutionary socialist international organization consisting of followers of Leon Trotsky, also known as Trotskyists, whose declared goal is the overthrowing of global capitalism and the establishment of world socialism via international revolution.

[^ejusdem-generis]: A canon of construction holding that when a general term follows a list of particular terms, the general term only applies to things similar to the particular terms. For example, in the list "sun, moon, and other large objects", the phrase "other large objects" only includes celestial bodies, not houses and elephants.

The distribution of legislative power has two interesting features. One
is the obvious weakness of the States. The Constitution recognizes that
most of the States have no lengthy history behind them, for they were
created under British rule for convenience of administration. The
ancestral loyalties relate not to States but to so-called racial
communities. Nor is it now impossible, as it used to be, that Madras
should be governed from New Delhi. Telephones and aeroplanes have made
all the difference.

The second feature causes more concern. Some Englishman is said to have
spoken about 'the glorious uncertainty of our law'. If he ever did say
it, he was no doubt using his prerogative of declaring that anything
English was _ipso facto_ good, for uncertainty in law is a most
undesirable characteristic. The question of _vires_ most likely to be
raised in India is that of the validity of State legislation. The
frequency with which the word 'repugnant' is used indicates how often the
question of the validity of such legislation will be raised. In addition
there will be all the problems caused by the Bill of Rights. Now
legislation whose validity can be challenged is legislation which people
will hesitate to obey. Since the practice of obedience to law is not
well established in India, the result may be that much State legislation
will be nullified by nonobservance. Perhaps I may give an example from
our beautiful city of Kandy. According to a notice which stands, or used
to stand, in the main street, there is in operation a by-law forbidding
persons to walk in the centre of the road, or words to that effect. If
that is what the by-law says, it is clearly void for uncertainty. If it
means that nobody may walk on the road it is void because it is
unreasonable and in conflict with statute law. Whatever the reason may
be, nobody in Kandy pays the slightest attention to it. It cannot be
said that the citizens of Kandy hold the jay-walking championship of
Ceylon, because at least one other Kandyan town has achieved a higher
standard, but at least it can be said that this by-law is a complete
nullity in _fact_ as well as _law_.

Now this is a serious matter because experience elsewhere has shown that
if persons are encouraged to disregard one part of the law, they tend to
disregard all parts of the law. The problem of nullity is inevitable
under a federal Constitution; it is necessarily more acute under a
federal Constitution which contains a Bill of Rights. In India the
States affect the lives of ordinary citizens more readily than the
Union. It is therefore a matter of importance that State law will be so
easily challengeable.

Part XI of the Constitution, unlike most federal Constitutions, contains
provisions governing the administrative relations between States. The
explanation appears to be that such provisions were included in the
Government of India Act, 1935. There they had some meaning, because they
were considered necessary in order to place provincial autonomy, in some
degree, under the Viceroy's control. In the present context articles 256
and 257, which in certain circumstances enable the Union Government to
give directions to the State Governments, seem to have little value. It
is not difficult to imagine a conflict between a Congress Government of
the Union and a non-Congress Government of a State. Possibly --- though
the question needs investigation --- it will be possible to get a _mandamus_
against a State which refuses to comply with directions; but is it
proposed to put a State Government into jail for contempt of court ?
Probably the remedy would be for the Governor to dismiss his Ministers.
This could happen, though, even if there were no such provision as
article 256 or article 257, as Australia has demonstrated. Besides, the
efficacy of the dismissal of Ministers depends on the willingness of the
electors to make a different choice at the ensuing general election,
which would in almost all cases be inevitable. It would seem that if a
federal system is selected one must put up with the inevitable
consequences of federalism, one of which is the possibility of a
conflict between the State and the Federal Governments.

Article 258 is an interesting attempt to meet some of the difficulties
of federalism which have been met with in Australia. Sub-clause (1) is
of no great importance, because it confers a power to vest Union
functions in State officials only with the consent of the State
Government. Sub-clause (2) not only repudiates the doctrine of 'the
immunity of instrumentalities' in so far as it might apply to Union
legislation, but specifically authorizes Parliament, within the limits
of its powers, to impose duties and confer rights on State officials.
How far a State official can serve two masters, especially when the two
masters are in conflict, is an interesting question to which time will
no doubt supply a negative answer.

Article 263 empowers the President to establish an inter-State Council.
One of the books on the new Constitution, after setting out the
investigating and advisory functions of the Council, adds: 'Such a
Council will also serve to iron out all inter-State differences and
animosities.' Optimism is not usually part of the stock-in-trade of the
constitutional lawyer, since he has to study not only the laws but also
the people who make them. It may be mere professional pessimism to
suggest that, since a similar idea has never been very successful
elsewhere, it is not likely to be very successful in India. A conference
between the Prime Minister and the State Premiers sometimes proves
helpful --- and sometimes not. At a lower level conferences between
Ministers and officials engaged in cognate aspects of administration
sometimes provide for valuable collaboration: but no formal
constitutional provision is necessary for these purposes. For the time
being article 263 may be regarded as potentially a dead letter.

Part XII of the Constitution, which deals with Finance, Property,
Contracts and Suits is so complicated that a detailed study is
impossible in this cursory survey of federal relationships. Indeed, a
constitutional lawyer has some sympathy with the State Minister of
Finance who said he could not understand it. Chapter I, which deals with
Finance, shows, as Mr Lionel Curtis had already demonstrated, that one
of the most difficult questions involved in the making of a federal
Constitution is the division of financial resources. The division of
taxing powers is in large measure determined by the division of
legislative powers. A power to tax is a power to destroy, or at least to
restrict severely. For instance, an excise or a sales tax of one hundred
% or more may destroy a trade under the legislative control of
another Government. What is more, while the Federal Government has heavy
expenditure on defence, the State Governments may have heavy expenditure
on social services: but in a comparatively undeveloped country like
India customs duties, which must be levied centrally, must cover a large
part of the total revenue. In short, the real problem is to give a State
a revenue commensurate with its responsibilities.

The problem is complicated, and the Constituent Assembly has provided a
complicated solution. Under the distribution of legislative power in the
Seventh Schedule, most of the larger taxing powers, both direct and
indirect, are vested in the Union. Under article 269, however, certain
taxes, including succession and estate duties, are collected 'by the
Union but assigned to the States, while under article 270 income taxes,
except on agricultural land, are collected by the Union and distributed
between the Union and the States. Specific grants are payable to certain
States under article 273, and there is a general duty to make grants
under article 275.

The effect of all this can be estimated only by those skilled in the
public finance of India. Experience elsewhere has shown that
arrangements of this character almost always prove to be unsatisfactory
after ten years or so. A system so rigid as that of India may prove to
be deficient even sooner. Indeed, the Constituent Assembly, with
pardonable humility, seems to have recognized this, for article 280
makes provision for a Finance Commission within two years, and again
every five years thereafter. These things are usually not decided by
Commissions, though; the problem is almost invariably one of votes.
Commissions propose, but politicians dispose, and politicians depend on
votes. There is no evidence to suggest that the genus will have any
different characteristics in India.
