# Conclusion

These lectures have appeared to give a more unfavourable verdict on the
Indian Constitution than the facts warrant, because certain portions
only have been selected for study. Those portions were of course
selected because they seemed to be the most susceptible of criticism. It
may be, too, that time will show that the fears expressed were
exaggerated. The Supreme Court could, by a few judicious
interpretations, put the process of judicial explanation into safe
channels. Its task is, however, a most difficult one, and it would not
be surprising if it failed. The fact that the Constituent Assembly had
to make substantial alterations in its own document, almost before the
ink was dry, is indicative of the nature of the problem. The first
general election was being held while these lectures were being
delivered, and the new Legislatures have not yet got into their stride.
The attempts of their predecessors to impose prohibition and abolish the
_zamindari_ system --- regarded purely as a constitutional process and not
as examples of social and political ideas --- were by no means happy.
Will their successors find their task any easier?

My own view is that the Constitution is far too large and therefore far
too rigid. As the first lecture sought to explain, the rigidity of a
Constitution is not determined solely by the nature of the amending
process; it is also determined by the volume which has to be amended.
The volume is indeed great because the Constituent Assembly was neither
content to state general principles like a Constitution in the Latin
tradition, nor to establish a set of institutions in the English
tradition. To the complications of federalism it has added the
complications of a Bill of Rights. So did the American colonists, but
they were content with general formulae, and they had no Government of
America Act to lead them astray.

The Indian reaction, like the American reaction, is in large measure a
product of British rule. The Constitution of the United States was by
reaction a product of George III and Lord North. The Indian Constitution
is by reaction a product of the Governments of MacDonald (in his last
and worst phase), Baldwin, Chamberlain and (to a less degree) Churchill.
It is impregnated with the idea that law and government are dangerous
and ought to be kept in concentration camps. Possibly, too, there are
implicit consequences of communal tensions and doubts whether democracy
always throws up the ablest and most public-spirited representatives of
the people. We have all realized, at times, with what little wisdom the
world is governed; and India can hardly be said to have been governed
with superabundant wisdom in the past fifty years.

One must not exaggerate. The Constituent Assembly has given India a
machine which ought to work. It is based upon the experience of a people
who, whatever their other defects may be, do know how to govern
themselves. In due course India will probably find, as the Irish did
very quickly, that it is the machine and the background of public
opinion which matter. The frills and furbelows of a Constitution are as
unnecessary as those of fashion. What is more, like those of fashion
they cost money. A constitutional lawyer who wants a simple, spartan
Constitution is perhaps as disloyal to his profession as a sari designer
who insists on plain georgette. He must confess, though, that a
Constitution works best when it discourages constitutional lawyers from
breeding.
