_Industrial risk was a dormant concern till it precipitated into the
Bhopal Gas Disaster in December 1984. The siting of industrial
risk, and its exiling, have been part of law, policy and practice over
the 20 years since Bhopal. There is, however, an incoherence in the
development of law and policy. The anxiety about risk and hazard
exists, but legal imagination has not been able to cope with the
consequences of either leaving risk where it is, or exiling it. The
courts do not possess the equipment needed to work out the
reorganisation of spaces to minimise, or outlaw, risk. Yet, when the
question of risk and hazard is taken to the court, the judiciary
cannot turn away. It has sometimes refused to be definitive, and
sometimes shown a tolerance of risk, asking of persons resident
around risk to become superior risk bearers._

\ 

Industrial risk is embedded in the prosaic
contours of the law. Its early
appearance in the Workmen's Compensation
Act 1923 recognised the risk
immanent in industry and identified workmen
as constituting the community at risk.
The location of the risk was confined to
the premises of the industrial establishment.
The 1923 Act acknowledged a regularity
with which occupational injury and
occupational disease were episodes in the
lives of workmen, and introduced this
acknowledgment in the statute.[^/1] There was
a tacit assumption of risk by the workman
who entered the premises where the risk
resided; and there was an assumption
of liability by the employer to compensate
a workman who was injured or rendered
ill because of a workplace 'accident'.
Traumatic episodes resulting in injury,
and non-traumatic illnesses[^/2] caused by
the process or substance involved in the
work, were both classed as 'accidents'.

The regulation of conditions of work in
factories, which began in the 19th century
with the Factories Act 1881, was reworked
into law in 1934, and again as the Factories'
Act 1948, confined itself to matters
of health, safety and welfare of the
workforce in the workplace.

In 1976, when chemical industries had
settled into the landscape, the heightened
perceptions of risk imprinted their anxieties
on the law. So, in 1976, the Factories
Act 1948 was amended to introduce the
notion of certain dangerous occurrences':
and the manager of a factory where 'any
dangerous occurrence of such nature as
may be prescribed occurs' was required
to notify the authorities who were designated
to receive, and act upon, such information.[^/3]
Again, 'safety and occupational
health surveys' were authorised to
be undertaken by the designated authorities,
and the "occupier or manager ... shall
afford all facilities for such survey, including
facilities for the examination and testing
of plant and machinery and collection of
sample and other data relevant to the
survey."[^/4] The constituency of the law
continued to be the workforce, and there
was a containment of concern to the
premises of the factory.

Evidence of emerging concerns regarding
safety and harm is discerned in the
enactment of laws including the Air (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 and the Water (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 which
grew out of an increasing awareness about
the need to control pollution occasioned by
industrialisation and urbanisation. These
hold the first glimmerings of understanding
that what happens on the premises of a
factory could affect persons and communities
well beyond its boundaries. Yet it
was not till the Bhopal Gas Disaster that
the designation of a community at risk was
dramatically altered.

In the intervening night of December 23,
1984, methyl isocyanate (MIC) leaked
out of the Union Carbide plant in Bhopal.
It left over 3,000 dead in its wake, and
over 5,00,000 people affected by the gas
in varying shades of severity. More than
15,000 people have died since that day of
gas related illnesses. It has been variously
called 'a grim tragedy',[^/5] "one of the most
tragic individual disasters in the recorded
history of mankind"[^/6] and "second in magnitude
and disastrous effects only to the
havoc brought by atomic explosions in
Hiroshima and Nagasaki"[^/7] by judges
deciding the Bhopal matters in the Supreme
Court. The Bhopal Gas Disaster,
demonstrating the potency of industry to
cause mass death, injury, illness and loss
well beyond the perimeters within which
its activities are located, altered industrial
risk irremediably, and expanded it into
industrial hazard. The constituency of
realised risk stood definitively changed.
The induction of the 'general public in the
vicinity of the factory into the law, as
potential victims of industrial hazard, is
a manifestation of this change.

# The Emergence of a Community at Risk

Till the Bhopal Gas Disaster happened,
industrial risk was linked with occupational
health and safety. The constituency of
industrial safety law was the workforce, and
the site of industrial risk was the premises
where industrial activity was carried on.

Immediately, and directly, the victims
of the disaster emerged as an identifiable
constituency that the law had to acknowledge.[^/8]
The victims bore these characteristics:

* That their residence was around the
factory. Of the 56 wards into which the
city of Bhopal is divided, the residents of 36 wards were affected by the disaster in
different measures of severity.
* Their habitation was in the nature of an
industrial shantytown. The houses were
packed close together, and the residents
belonged to the working classes.
* While there were those among the victims
who lived in the area and worked in
the Union Carbide Plant, they largely comprised
persons who had no connection
with the industry beyond being residents
in the vicinity.

The litigation around compensation,
criminal prosecution of the company officials,
medical relief and treatment, and
residual and spreading contamination in
and around the factory, followed a tortuous
course over the succeeding years; in
fact, much of it remains to be concluded
in 2004.

In February 1989, the union of India,
representing all the victims of the disaster[^/9]
settled the claims for compensation for
US $475 million. The categorisation of
claims arising out of the disaster began
after challenges to the settlement by victims'
groups and public interest petitioners
had been decided by the Supreme Court
in 1991.[^/10] The exercise continues with
over 16,000 claims still to be decided. On
July 19, 2004, the Supreme Court ordered
that the monies which remained under
control of the union of India belonged with
the victims, and that it be disbursed _pro
rata_ among them;[^/11] this process is yet to
begin. The criminal trial of the offending
company and its officials and of the officers
of its Indian subsidiary is still
under prosecution in the court of first instance,
with the Union Carbide Corporation
(UCC) and Warren Anderson, the
CEO at the time of the disaster, being
declared absconders.[^/12] After years of
agitating for treatment and monitoring of
the health of the victims, the court has
conceded a demand for setting up an
independent medical commission.[^/13] The
soil and ground water contamination in
and around the factory, not all of it caused
by the disaster but aggravated by the neglect
and abandonment of the site following the
disaster, was detected and reported upon
by Greenpeace in 1999,[^/14] and a court in
the US, in March 2004 declared its willingness
to order a clean-up, and the government
of India agreed to let Union Carbide
and Dow Chemicals (who have taken over
UCC) comply with the US court's direction.[^/15]
This process is yet to begin.

In the meantime, a day and a year after
the Bhopal Gas Disaster, an industrial
accident in Delhi provided the impetus for
reconsidering the context of industrial risk
and disaster. On December 4, 1985. oleum
gas leaked into the atmosphere in Delhi,
spreading from its source in the factory of
Shriram Foods and Fertilisers, moving
through populous zones, affecting large
numbers of the public that it encountered
on its way, reportedly resulting in a death
of an advocate in the Tis Hazari courts
caused by inhalation of the gas. Even as
the enormity of the Bhopal Gas Disaster
paralysed parts of the apparatus --- and even
as disinformation, lack of information and
unpreparedness aggravated the direct damage
to those affected by that disaster --- the
oleum gas leak, with the relatively limited
extent of injury and loss, allowed an
immediacy to enter the discourse. Where
Bhopal showed up the vulnerability of the
industrial shantytown, the oleum gas leak
raised the spectre of the denizens of Delhi
living under perpetual threat posed by
hazardous industry. The populations at risk
were identified by the experience of realised
risk in one instance, and the demonstration
of potential risk in the other.

The oleum gas leak provoked a range
of responses including

* Legislative changes, particularly to the
Factories Act 1948 in 1987,
* Essaying a policy of deterrence through
an enunciation of enterprise liability,[^/16]
and
* The induction, into policy, of relocation
of hazardous industry away from concentration
of populations

# Amending the Factories Act 1948 in 1987

There are three aspects of the amendment
made to the Factories Act 1948 in
1987, incorporating the experience of the
Bhopal Gas Disaster and the oleum gas
leak, which are directly related to a recognition,
and anticipation of a community
at risk. Abandoning the presumption that
industrial risk is related only to the
workforce and is restricted to the premises
of a factory, parliament acknowledged the
risk posed to "the general public in the
vicinity" by a factory "involving a hazardous
process".[^/17] The distancing of the
population at risk from the factory, especially
of those factories already established,
being an improbable solution to the question
of risk, the amended law instead
requires "compulsory disclosure of information"
"regarding dangers, including
health hazards and the measures to overcome
such hazards arising from the exposure
to or handling of the materials or
substances in the manufacture, transportation,
storage and other processes".[^/18] With
the introduction of this provision into the
law, _the recognition of a community at risk
was expanded beyond the workforce to
include persons in the vicinity of the risk_.
The factory is still the site from where the
risk emanates, but the effect of realised
risk was acknowledged as reaching beyond
the premises of the factory.

The second aspect was concerned with
prospective location of industrial risk.
There is an inevitable constriction of choice
where a factory has already been established
and is in operation, and where a
population has settled around it. Against
the background of the Bhopal Gas Disaster
and the oleum gas leak, the realisation of
risk, even disaster, has necessarily become
a part of law and policy. A Site Appraisal
Committee has, therefore, been introduced
by the law "for purposes of advising (the
government) to consider applications for
grant of permission for the _initial location_
of a factory involving a hazardous process
or for the _expansion_ of any such factory".[^/19]
Among its members are to be an expert
in the field of occupational health, a representative
of the Town Planning Department
of the state government, water and
air pollution control authorities, a representative
of the meteorological department
of the government of India, a representative
of the local authority and the chief
inspector of factories.

Factories in operation, and those being
established, are required to draw up "onsite
emergency plan and detailed disaster
control measures". And "workers employed
(in the factory) and the general public
living in the vicinity of the factories" are
to be informed of "the safety measures
required to be taken in the event of an
accident taking place."[^/20] This is the third
aspect of risk recognition that has been
cnacted into law.

# Compensation, Liability and Deterrence

There are three approaches that law could
offer for reducing risk and enhancing safety.
The first is _preventing risk realisation_. So,
authorising workers to alert the inspector
of factories, and the management, to lapses
of safety;[^/21] and monitoring and regulating
the safety features in the running of a
factory, are moves towards preventing
accidents and disasters.[^/22]

The second is the threat of _criminal
prosecution_, both under the Penal Code
1860, which deals with crimes, and as
'absolute offences', where breach of a
provision in the law becomes punishable
even where no intention to commit an
offence need be proved before punishment
is visited upon the person found to have
been responsible --- by neglect or by commission.
Breaches of provisions in the
Factories Act 1948 fall within the law's
understanding of absolute offences.[^/23]

The third is _deterrence through a deep
pocket approach to compensation_. After
the oleum gas leak, for instance, a director
of the offending company was called upon
to undertake to pay compensation from his
own resources --- not to be reimbursed by
the company --- in the event of a further
leak, before the factory was permitted to
re-start its operations.[^/24] The Supreme
Court also brought on board a notion of
'absolute liability' and 'enterprise liability',
which would strengthen the
enterprise's interest in ensuring safety.[^/25]

# Industry Relocation

The most dramatic response to industrial
risk has been relocation. The ascension of
risk to a hazard, and the experience of that
hazard in Bhopal, has altered the perception
of acceptable risk. The growth of
settlements around factories has been both
inevitable, and by policy[^/26] illustrates the
emergence of a community of those officially
housed by the company in the
vicinity of the factory, and employees in
_jhuggies_ and 'outsiders' allowed to settle
around the factory premises. Bhopal had
demonstrated the vulnerability of the population
around the factory to realised risk;
and the oleum gas leak had reinforced fears
that whole populations of cities could be
at enormous risk. The exiling of risk and
hazard was one possible response; the
minimising of risk was another.

In February 1986, the Supreme Court
considered the implications of the continuance
of hazardous industry in the city
of Delhi. They relied on the opinion of
expert committees which had been set up
to investigate safety and risk in the offending
factory. "All the expert committees are
unanimous in their view that by adopting
proper and adequate safety measures the
element of risk to the workmen and the
public can only be minimised but it cannot
be totally eliminated," the court said. An
expert was quoted as saying that the caustic
chlorine plant from which the oleum gas
had leaked revealed 'a worrying state of
affairs', and that the plant was liable to
be "classed as a major hazard facility by
applying most of the currently accepted
definitions".[^/27] 'Relocation', he said, "is
the only practicable long-term option which
would guarantee the complete removal of
the community risk"[^/28] A second expert
committee's opinion read: "The risk due
to major release of chlorine could only be
reduced but not completely eliminated.
Complete elimination of the risk to the
population at large obviously lies in relocation
of the plant in an area without
human habitation".[^/29] It was then observed
that, beyond the immediate question of
what was to be done with the offending
industry, "a National Policy will have to
be evolved by the government for location
of toxic or hazardous industries and a decision
will have to be taken in regard to
relocation of such industries with a view to
eliminating risk to the community likely to
arise from the operation of such industries."

Over 10 years later, on July 8, 1996, the
Supreme Court passed an order directing 168
hazardous industries to "stop functioning
and operating in the city of Delhi
with effect from November 30, 1996".[^/30]
"These industries may relocate/shift themselves
to any other industrial estate in the
National Capital Region," the court said
while asking the National Capital Region
Planning Board to "render all assistance
to the industries in the process of relocation".[^/31]
The "closure order with
effect from November 30, 1996" was made
'unconditional', and 'even if the relocation
of industries is not complete they shall
stop functioning in Delhi with effect from
November 30, 1996'.[^/32]

There is a significant shift in emphasis
that occurred between 1985 and 1996. The 1985
court was still under the Bhopal
cloud, darkened further by the oleum gas
leak. In the years since 1985, pollution and
the environment had gained an ascendancy
in the agenda of the court; the 1996 court
was therefore inclined to consider relocation
of industries in the context of
pollution, as a non-traumatic condition,
rather than as a matter of potential hazard
or a traumatic occurrence. The cleaning up
and beautification of the city was given a
priority. So the 1996 court remarked:[^/33]

>Delhi is one of the most polluted cities in
the world. The quality of ambient air is so
hazardous that lung and respiratory diseases
are on the increase ... Once a beautiful
city, Delhi now presents a chaotic picture.
The only way to revive the capital city
from the huge additional cost burden and
pressures, is to deconcentrate the population,
industries and economic activities in
the city and relocate the same in various
priority towns in the National Capital
Region.

The revision of the 1962 Master Plan for
Delhi was also undertaken in this period,
in 1990, and there it was asserted that
'hazardous and noxious industrial units'
were 'not permitted in Delhi', and existing
hazardous industries "shall be shifted on
priority within a maximum time period of
three years".[^/34]

The prescription of relocation was retained,
through shifting judicial priorities
and the constructing of executive policy.
The demolition of _jhuggi_ settlements and
the policy of resettlement of slum dwellers
to the outskirts of Delhi, with relocated
chemical industry in their neighbourhood,
illustrates the constructing of communities
at risk, and is set out further in this narrative.
The offer to workers to move with
the polluting, hazardous industry to its
new site and the absence of reduction,
or minimising, of risk in the prose of
state policy and judicial _dicta_ will also
find its statement later. The Delhi industries'
relocation formula has proved to
be the exception, as is witnessed in
judicial engagement with the issue of hazardous
industry, first in Thane, near
Mumbai and more recently in Cochin in
Kerala.

# Public Interest Litigation (PIL)

The court-devised jurisdiction in PIL
(public interest litigation) rendered possible
judicial engagement with decisions
about locating, and re-locating, risk. PIL
is a product of the late 1970s and 1980s,
and was constructed through exercises in
juristic activism, that is, judges re-framed
the rules of practice of law, starting with
diluting the rule of _locus standi_. Traditional
approaches to the court only permitted
affected persons to agitate their claims
and complaints in the court. PIL allowed,
even encouraged, well-intentioned persons
including professors, journalists, social
activists working at the grass roots, to take
matters to the court where a class of people
were seen to be deprived of their fundamental
rights.[^/35] This was intended to bring
the cause of those deprived of access to
the court due to indigence, illiteracy or
ignorance of their rights, or due to systems
of exploitation, to have their issues brought
to the court, on their behalf, even if in their
absence. The procedure that made the
services of a professional lawyer necessary
to reach the court was simplified, and
even a letter addressed to the court was
treated as a petition, earning the appellation
'epistolary jurisdiction'.

PIL gave the court a renewed relevance,
and extended its reach to all matters of
'public interest'.[^/36] In its nascence, PIL's
constituency was bonded labour, prisoners,
child labour, the mentally ill, women
in custodial institutions. In the later half
of the 1980s, environment began to occupy
a place of prominence. And, in the
1990s, environment dominated judicial
discourse as matters of public interest.[^/37]
PIL invested the court with a power that
was greater than that given to the court in
traditional litigation, which would go a
good distance in explaining the broad sweep
of the orders passed by the court.[^/38]

The oleum gas leak was heard and
decided by the court as PIL. Judicial
entrenching into the policy arena, which
is generally considered the exclusive territory
of the executive, and the considered
options of relocation, and shop floor routes
to safety[^/39] were facilitated by the expansive
understanding of the court's power in
matters of 'public interest' --- a general term
of broad definition. The 1996 order peremptorily
outlawing hazardous industry
from Delhi came through this exercise of
judicial power.

Yet, when _F B Taraporewala vs Bayer
India_[^/40] and _Fertilisers and Chemicals
Travancore Employees Association vs Law
Society of India_[^/41] were brought to court,
the threat posed by hazardous industry to
concentrations of population did not provoke
the court to exercise judicial power
it had cultivated in its PIL jurisdiction.

In _Bayer India vs State of Maharashtra_,[^/42]
the industry manufactured chemicals and
drugs. Their factories were located in
Thane, near Mumbai. When the factories
were set up, the Supreme Court observed,
"there were no residential buildings anywhere
near the factories."[^/43] Over time,
builders and private persons raised constructions
'in the vicinity' of these factories.
The factory went to court saying "that
hazardous substance and gases are stored
and utilised in the said factories and that
the danger of an explosion or a leak like
the one that took place in Bhopal, in 1984,
cannot be ruled out. If any such accident
happens it may lead to greater damage to
human life than at Bhopal. To guard against
any such eventuality, they say that within
a radius of one kilometre, no residential
buildings should be allowed to be constructed."[^/44]
The context in the court arose
out of proposed construction activity in the
vicinity of the factories and the resistance
of the factories to construction being permitted
in an area that they said had been
marked for industrial use. It was taken to
the court as PIL; in February 1993, the
Supreme Court redirected the dispute to
the Bombay High Court.

The conflicting interests of industry and
the builders remaining unresolved, the issue
was taken, in a second round, to the
Supreme Court. The complexity in exiling
risk, as also in authorising risk to continue
where it was located, pervades the judgment
of the Supreme Court, which was
delivered in September 1996.

"Industrial growth, yes, but by exposing
a large segment of society to the risk of
losing lives, no. This apprehension is not
imaginary", the Supreme Court exclaimed.[^/45]
The Supreme Court saw itself
poised on the horns of a dilemma. If they
endorsed the prohibition of further construction
within proximity of the factories,
it would adversely affect the right to reside
in the locality, which would amount to
'immunity to the industrialists' and 'injustice'
to the aspiring residents, "leaving at
the same time large number of inhabitants
already residing exposed to the risk."[^/46]
So, the court thought "that if the industrialists
wanted to safeguard their interest
in the event of some accident happening
in their factories, it was for them either to
obtain the ownership of the area in question
or to shift their factories to such places
where the residential area could be kept
wide apart from the factory premises."[^/47]
But, the industries had averred, "relocation
is not possible logistically, financially
or otherwise."[^/48] '\[W\]e,' said the court,
"have neither the expertise nor are we in
possession of various information, which
shall be required, to decide one way or the
other ... the question of relocation."[^/49] And
with that, the court directed that a committee
be constituted under the Environment
Protection Act 1986 to consider the
possibility of relocation, but would make
no direction itself.

The unease of the court pervades the
judgment. '\[T\]he very lives of the inhabitants
living around the factories in question
are in great jeopardy so much so that
any probable accident in the factories may
see annihilation of a large number of
inhabitants," the court agonised. "But then
relocation does need a deeper probe ..."

In Taraporuwala, the community at risk
was identified as the population within a
radius of one kilometre around the factories.
In _Fertilisers and Chemicals
Travancore Employees Association vs Law
Society of India_,[^/50] the community at risk
was the population of Willingdon Island
and Cochin. Manufacturing chemicals and
fertilisers, the company imported ammonia
in special refrigerated ships and stored
it in a storage tank located on Willingdon
Island. This was then moved by rail to
Cochin where it was stored in a bigger
ammonia storage tank before it was pumped
into its consuming plant. The PIL petitioner
who went to court anticipated "devastating
catastrophe ... in the event of a major
leak in the ... ammonia tank."[^/51] Anaircrash,
an act of sabotage, or an earthquake could
lead to loss of life on a tragic scale. And
"effective environmental protection and
improvement being a matter of legal rights
and duties", the high court agreed with the
petitioner and ordered the closing down
of the tank.

The Supreme Court held a different
position. Pragmatism, and a perception of
risk and hazard as inherent in the ways of
the modern world, led the court to draw
up a calculus between "utilities which exist
in public interest ... and human safety"[^/52]
"In modern times", the court said, "we
have nuclear plants which generate electricity.
Their structural integrity and their
operations are vulnerable to certain risks.
However, generation of electricity is
equally important and within the prescribed
limits society will have to tolerate existence
of such plants ... If the arguments of the ...
petitioner are accepted then no such utility
can exist, no power plant can exist, no
reservoir can exist, no nuclear reactor
can exist."[^/53] And added: "we do not discount
such risks but are counterbalanced
by services and amenities provided by these
utilities."[^/54]

Judicial tolerance of risk and hazard
appears to have grown with increasing
temporal distance from the Bhopal Gas
Disaster. There is a re-prioritisation that
has occurred which can in part be traced
to fading institutional memory,[^/55] where
the reality of disaster has given place to
the reconstruction of a disaster as hypothesis.
In further part, this represents an
endorsement of the developmental, and
pragmatic, choices made by the state, and
endorsed by the court as a concomitant of
modernity. That communities at risk are
often inchoate communities till the risk
precipitates and becomes a hazard has
contributed to the takeover by re-ordered
priorities. In the context of atomic energy
which is state controlled, governed by a
statute,[^/56] and where secrecy is the prevailing
norm --- the court has refused to enforce
disclosure on matters of safety and
hazard, with state privilege to hold back
information being endorsed, and the community
at risk relegated to the sidelines.[^/57]

The impossibility of closing, shifting
and relocating industries, as a way of
protecting communities from risk has
entered judicial discourse. The perceived
necessity for industry has led the court to
demand a generally heightened tolerance
of risk. Where efforts to exile risk are
made, however, there are processes underway
to pre-determine the communities that
shall be placed at risk.

# Constructing Communities at Risk

Relocation, resettlement, rehabilitation
and relief have been processes which have
involved decisions in policy and law about
proximity to risk. After the Bhopal Gas
Disaster, the precipitation of industrial risk
into a hazardous episode is no longer a
hypothesis. Union Carbide attempted to
pass off the disaster as an act of sabotage,
although this stands discredited both by
the changing versions that the company
put out over time, and by its inaction in
pursuing its claim.[^/58] The petition to the
district court in Bhopal avers that design
defect, and declining investment in maintenance
of safety in the plant (where
operations had ceased while a decision
was being made about dismantling and
shipping the plant to a yet undecided
location), were responsible for the disaster.[^/59]
This still holds true as the most
probable theory. The criminal trial of the
India accused is unconcluded and continuing,
while Warren Anderson, the then CEO
of UCC, and the company itself, are accused
but absconding. Whether a conclusive
explanation for the disaster will emerge
is yet uncertain. What stands demonstrated
is the dangers inherent in hazardous processes
in industry, including the storage,
transportation, disposal and manufacture,
using hazardous substances.

The Bhopal Gas Disaster created a
community of victims. It is recognising this
community that the union of India took
over the litigation, and acted on their behalf,
against the Union Carbide. It was also an
acknowledgment of the time that it could
take for the litigation to conclude, and for
the victims to be compensated which would
pit the staying power of the victim community
against that of a multinational corporate
giant. In February 1989, the Union
of India settled the matter of compensation
in the Supreme Court.[^/60] The settlement
was challenged by victims' groups and by
public interest petitioners, and, in 1991,
the Supreme Court endorsed the 1989
settlement with significant modifications.[^/61]

In 1985, marginal relief was reached to
the victims, and milk, bread, sugar and
edible oil were distributed; but this was
soon discontinued. It was only on March 3,
1989, that an order of the Supreme Court
directed the state to provide for interim
relief to the victims.[^/62] On April 28, 1989,
the amounts paid as interim relief were
directed to be paid into 'the State Bank
of India nearest to the residence of the
victims'.[^/63] On March 12, 1989, the state
said on affidavit before the Supreme
Court that "the government of India has
decided to give interim relief to all the
residents of the 36 severely affected
wards of Bhopal who were there on the
night of the disaster. This decision to
cover all the residents has been taken
because there is a likelihood of long-term
health damage to all persons who were
exposed to the MIC and other toxic
gases."[^/64]

The categorisation of the claims of the
victims, and the determination of compensation
amounts to be paid to them, was
begun only in 1991, after the Supreme
Court had reviewed the settlement and
upheld the composite amount of US$ 475
million. In 2004, nearly 20 years have
passed since the disaster, and the process
is not yet concluded.[^/65]

The recognition as victim, the access to
interim relief (including medical relief)
and the capacity to pursue a compensation
claim to finality have been integrally
connected with the continuance of the
victims in the residences they occupied at
the time of the accident. The onus was on
the victims to stay, and pursue their claim,
as witness the Welfare Commissioner's
statement in Bhopal:[^/66] "The allegation ...
that many claimants have neither received
notices nor they are able to find out the
exact status of their cases, having changed
their address may be potentially true, but
it is the responsibility of the claimants to
get their changed address recorded in the
proper column of their claim application
to get it filled in the record of their case
so that the notices could be sent on their
changed addresses."

Fifteen years after the disaster, in 1999,
Greenpeace published the results of tests
that it conducted to verify the levels of
contamination in and around Union Carbide
factory site in Bhopal. Very little attention
had been paid to the state of the Union
Carbide India site and immediate
surroundings with respect to contaminants
other than MIC which may have been
present not only as a result of the accident,
but also the routine operation of the plant,"
the Greenpeace report said.[^/67] "As legal
processes continue to try to establish liability
and compensation following the 1984
disaster, responsibility for the contamination
which remains on and around
the site remains unaddressed. Given the
nature of the problem of the plant, and the
chemicals handled, it is possible that residents
of the community surrounding the
former UCIL site may still be exposed to
hazardous chemicals on a daily basis," the
report continued.

The factory was closed down after the
accident, and has lain neglected since then.
The land and groundwater in and around
the factory have proven to be contaminated,
The parts of the factory that continue to
stand are in a state of disintegration; on
January 16, 2004, when a team of researchers
and activists visited the factory site, we
were witness to a corroded part of the plant
having collapsed as rust, and a leak leaving
an unidentified chemical dribbling to the
ground in a location within the plant.

The absence of choice brought on by the
impoverishment visited on the victims of
the disaster due to the harm endured by
them is one reason why the victims may
not be able to move away from the site of
realised risk. The capacity to access relief,
and be recognised as a victim entitled to
compensation, also lies in with their continued
residence around the site of the
disaster. The responsibility for reducing
the risk posed to a populace that has been
exposed to realised risk is, however, not
within the scheme of relief and compensation
that has developed around the Bhopal
Gas Disaster. The choice thus, for the
victims, is to leave the site of precipitated
risk, if they can, and reduce their capacity
to pursue their rights as victims of the
disaster, even as the years of unconcluded
proceedings extend into decades; or, to
stay on as a community at continuing risk.
Neither law nor policy has provided the
victims with a third option.

# Industries Relocation, Workers and Demolition

The prescription of relocation of industries
within Delhi was to protect the
denizens of the city from the risk posed
by industrial hazard. The oleum gas leak
had provided the impetus for effecting
relocation. Relocation involved exile. The
industries were to be exiled, away from the
population perceived at risk. There were,
however, two communities that were sent
into exile along with the risk.

The workers were the first to be offered
passage along with the exiled industry, to
the relocation site. In 1996, when the
Supreme Court ordered the closure of
hazardous industry, the state was asked to
help identify, and develop, relocation
sites. While passing the closure order, the
Supreme Court had only the denizens of
Delhi in its vision; the workers, even as
denizens, stayed beyond its ken.[^/68] The
workers, with unernployment looming on
the horizon, approached the court to reconsider
its decision, as it would severely
impact on the waged workforce. The court,
in acknowledging the justified agitation of
the workers, inducted the concern of the
workers into the scheme of closure and
relocation. So, it directed that the workers
would have continuity of employment in
the industry, if the industry was shifted and
relocated. If the industry were closed down,
the workers were to be paid six years wages
as retrenchment compensation.[^/69]

Even as the industry was thus provided
with a disincentive to close down, the
workers were encouraged to move with the
industry, and its risk, to a new locale, away
from the city --- which was to be protected
from risk. In 1993, the Delhi High Court
had begun a process of clearing Delhi of
its slum settlements.[^/70] Slum dwellers already
reside in a zone of illegality; legality
of living spaces in the city is more expensive
than those among the urban poor can
afford. The process of delegitimation of
the claim of the poor to housing and shelter
in the city was effected through the depiction
of the urban poor as 'encroachers'
who were trenching on the city's legal
residents. The most graphic manifestation
of the prejudice practised against the urban
poor was when the Supreme Court infamously
said:[^/71] "Rewarding an encroacher
on public land with a free alternative site
is like giving a reward to a pickpocket."
Having so discredited the slum dweller,
the state was pressured to fulfil the agenda
of cleaning up the city.[^/72]

The process involved two steps: demolition
and resettlement. While all slum
settlements could be demolished under the
authority of law as sanctified by the High
court and the Supreme Court, only those
who had documents to prove that they had
been long in residence in the slum were
entitled to a resettlement site. The demolished
community was, to this purpose,
divided into the eligibles and the
ineligibles.[^/73] The resettlement sites are in
the outskirts of the city. The exiling of the
demolished community has been worked
in conjunction with the exiling of chemical
industry. Narela is a resettlement site at
least 20 kms from the demolished sites,
beyond the city limits. It is in the explicit
policy of relocating the chemical industry
in proximity to the resettlement site in
Narela that the construction of a community
at risk is most obvious. The resettlement
site is within four kilometres of the
site that has been prepared to receive chemical
industries exiled from the city. The
location of the chemical industry near the
resettlement site has been one way of
addressing the criticism that the resettlement
policy makes the resettlers lose jobs
which were near their earlier settlement
but was now too far to be practicable to
traverse every day. On bringing the chemical
industries within range of the resettlement
site, the industries are provided with
a captive working class population, and
the re-settlers find the promise of potential
employment within accessible range.[^/74]

It is significant that, among the conditions
of licence on the basis of which the
resettled person may continue in possession,
is this, that such person shall be in
personal occupancy of the allotted site. If
anyone else is found inhabiting the site,
the licence may be revoked. This was
purportedly introduced as a clause in the
licence to prevent the alienation of the site
to third parties, while the original allottee
returned to the original vicinity of residence,
prompted by nearness to the workplace
or any other such reason of convenience
and capacity. This condition, then,
compels the resettled person to either stay
in the resettlement site, or stand to lose
possession of the site, along with any
amounts that may have been paid to the
administration before being given possession
of the site, and any investment made
thereafter.

The Hobson's choice offered to workers
--- to travel with the risk or face unemployment
--- and the choicelessness that the
slum dwellers at the resettlement site face,
illustrates the choices made in state policy
about communities that may be placed at
risk, and around potential hazard. And,
even as industrial risk is exiled along with
those who are to be its neighbours, there
is a stark silence on reduction of risk. In
the reconstruction of communities displaced
by closing down livelihoods, demolition
of settlements or large scale project
displacement,[^/75] the construction of communities
at risk is in evidence.

# Conclusion

Industrial risk was a dormant concern till
it precipitated into the Bhopal Gas Disaster
in December 1984. The siting of industrial
risk, and its exiling, have been part of law,
policy and practice over the 20 years since
the Bhopal Gas Disaster. The recognition
of communities at industrial risk expanded
then from the workforce into the general
public in the vicinity, and the site of realised
risk shifted beyond the premises where
industrial risk was located, to the larger
community. The oleum gas leak, within
temporal sight of the Bhopal Gas Disaster,
spurred the response of relocation into the
public domain. But the growth of habitation
around industry, the difficulties in
creating buffer zones for industry in city
spaces, and the costs and impracticability
of shifting industry and of finding riskfree
zones (if such exist) has made relocation
an option that the court has not
uniformly been willing to push, especially
retrospectively, where industry is already
established.

There is no uniform definition of a
community at industrial risk. The 36 wards
of the severely affected in Bhopal emerged
as a community who had been at risk; but
were recognised as such only after the risk
had precipitated. The long years to compensation
and relief, and the neglect of risk
reduction in a location that had proved its
potency, made them an identifiable community
left at risk. After the oleum gas
leak, the denizens of Delhi were all
identified as at risk. The created proximity
between the exiled industrial risk and the
reconstructed population has constructed
a community at risk. And the workers have
been given the choice that choicelessness
offers --- of travelling with the risk to hold
on to their work and wages.

There is an incoherence in the development
of law and policy on industrial risk.
The anxiety about risk and hazard exists,
but legal imagination has not been able to
cope with the consequences of either leaving
risk where it is, orexiling it. The courts do
not possess the equipment needed to
work out the reorganisation of spaces
to minimise, or outlaw, risk. Yet, when the
question of risk and hazard is taken to the
court, the court cannot turn away. It has
sometimes refused to be definitive, and
sometimes shown a tolerance of risk, asking
of persons resident around risk to become
superior risk bearers. The unease of the law
persists.

The ways of the law, and of policy, do
inexorably move reconstructed communities
and exiled risk into proximity with one
and another. The deliberated construction
of communities at risk is found in these
experiences.


[^/1]: Schedules II and III of the Workmen's
Compensation Act 1923.

[^/2]: Jane Stapleton, Disease and Compensation
Debate (1986).

[^/3]: Sec 88A, Factories Act 1948 as amended in 1976.

[^/4]: Sec 91A(1) of the Factories Act 1948 as amended
in 1976.

[^/5]: Justice S Mukharji in _Charan Lal Salu vs
Union of India_ (1990) 1 SCC 613 at 632.

[^/6]: Justice K N Singh, _ibid._ at p. 709.

[^/7]: Justice S Ranganathan, _ibid._ at p. 714.

[^/8]: Those who survived the disaster and those who
were affected by the disaster.

[^/9]: By authority invested in the government by
the Bhopal Gas Disaster (Processing of Claims)
Act 1985 which was enacted to enable the
government to take over the litigation from the
victims and to conduct it to a close on behalf
of the victims.

[^/10]: _Union Carbide Corporation vs Union of India_
(1991) 4 SCC 584.

[^/11]: Order dated July 19, 2004 of the Supreme
Court in IA No 46--47 in CA Nos 3187--88 of 1988.

[^/12]: Order dated February 1, 1992 of the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Bhopal in MJC No 91 of

[^/13]: Proceedings in the Supreme Court in WP(C)
No 50 of 1998 (Bhopal Gas Peedith Mahila
Udyog Sangathan and others vs Union of
India and others).

[^/14]: Greenpeace, The Bhopal Legacy, 1999,
Greenpeace Research Laboratories,
Department of Biological Sciences, University
of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

[^/15]: Letter dated June 28, 2004 delivered by hand
to the Court of US District Judge John F
Keenan in the matter of _Re Bano et al vs Union
Carbide_ 99. (iv 11329 JFK)

[^/16]: _M C Mehia vs Union of India_ (1987) 1 SCC 395.

[^/17]: Sec 41 B, Factories Act 1948 as amended in 1987.

[^/18]: _Ibid._

[^/19]: Sec 41 A, Factories Act 1948 as amended in 1987. emphasis added.

[^/20]: Sec 41 B. Factories Act 1948 as amended in 1987. The Factories Inspector and the local
authority too are to be informed.

[^/21]: Sec 41 H, Factories Act 1948 as amended in 1987.

[^/22]: The identity of a person who draws attention to lapses of safety is part of this scheme for
enhancing safety: Sec 118 A, Factories Act 1948
as amended in 1987.

[^/23]: _J K Industries vs Chief Inspecior of Factories_
(1996) 6 SCC 665.

[^/24]: _M C Mehta vs Union of India_ (1986) 2 SCC 325 at 329.

[^/25]: _M C Mehta vs Union of India_ (1987) 2 SCC 395.

[^/26]: _See_, for e.g. _Lalla Ram vs DCM Chemical
Works Ltd_ (1978) 3 SCC 1.

[^/27]: _M C Mehta vs Union of India_ (1986) 2 SCC 176 at 184.

[^/28]: _Ibid_ at p. 185.

[^/29]: _Ibid._

[^/30]: \(1996) 4 SCC 750 at 769.

[^/31]: _Id_ at p. 769.

[^/32]: _Ibid._

[^/33]: _Id_ at p. 752.

[^/34]: Cited at _id_ at p. 752.

[^/35]: These are detailed in Part III of the Constitution
of India. The right to approach the Supreme
Court for a remedy where fundamental right
are violated is itself a FR in Article 32 of the
Constitution.

[^/36]: Ashok Desai and S Muralidhar, 'Public Interest
Litigation: Potential and Problems' in BN
Kirpal (ed), _Supreme hut nor Infallible: Essays
in Honour of the Supreme Court of India_
Oxford, 2000, 159.

[^/37]: Issues of corruption and public accountability
too gave PIL, and 'judicial activism', a high
profile, but it is environment that has re-prioritised
other concerns. _See_, for instance,
the replacing of hazard and safety with pollution
and cleaning up referred to earlier in this essay.
_See_ S Muralidhar, 'Public Interest Litigation'
XXXII Annual Survey of Indian Law, 369. 385.

[^/38]: _T N Godavarman Tirumulkpad_ (1997) 2 SCC
267; _Almitra H Patel vs Union of India_ (1999) 5 SCALE 154; (1999) 7 SCALE 376.

[^/39]: _M C Mehta vs Union of India_ (1986) 2 SCC 176 and 325

[^/40]: \(1996) 6 SCC 58.

[^/41]: \(2004) 4 SCC 420.

[^/42]: \(1993) 3 SCC 29.

[^/43]: _Id_ at p. 31.

[^/44]: _Id_ at pp. 30--31.

[^/45]: _F B Taraporawala vs Bayer India Ltd_ (1996) 6 SCC 58 at 59.

[^/46]: _Id_ at p. 60.

[^/47]: _Ibid._

[^/48]: _Ibid._

[^/49]: _Id_ at p. 61.

[^/50]: \(2004) 4 SCC 420.

[^/51]: _Id_ at p. 422.

[^/52]: _Id_ at p. 426.

[^/53]: _Id_ at p. 424.

[^/54]: _Ibid._ While so deciding, the court took the
assistance of an expert body to assess, and
pronounce upon, the risk.

[^/55]: The Fertilizers case does not even mention the
Bhopal Gas Disaster, unlike _Bayer_ and
_Taraporawala_.

[^/56]: The Atomic Energy Act 1962.

[^/57]: _PUCL vs Union of India_ (2004) 2 SCC 476.

[^/58]: Set out in the 'Reply of Union of India' before
the court of the District Judge, Bhopal, dated
January 6, 1987, reproduced in Upendra Baxi
and Amita Dhanda, _Valiant Victims and Lethal
Litigation: The Bhopal Case_, N M Tripathi,
Bombay, 1990, pp. 122, 124.

[^/59]: _Ibid._

[^/60]: _Union Carbide Corporation vs Union of India_
(1989) 1 SCC 674.

[^/61]: _Union Carbide Corporation vs Union of India_
(1991) 4 SCC 584.

[^/62]: Order of a Constitution Bench of the Supreme
Court in the matter of _Bhopal Gas Peedit
Mahila Udyog Sangaihan vs Union of India_
Writ Petition (Civil) No 843 of 1988, dated
March 3, 1989, reproduced in _Valiant Victims_
at pp. 667--69.

[^/63]: _Valiant Victims_ at p. 672.

[^/64]: _Valiant Victims_ at p. 676.

[^/65]: Affidavit dated July 1, 2003 of Veena Gupta,
director, Government of India, - Industry of
Chemicals and Petro Chemicals in IA No 46--47 in CA Nos 3187--88/1988.

[^/66]: _Bhopal Gas Peedith Mahila Udyog Sangathan
vs Union of India_ Writ Petition (Civil) No 415
of 2000 in the Supreme Court, p. 66 of the
paper book.

[^/67]: Greenpeace, _The Bhopal Legacy_, 1999,
Greenpeace Research Laboratories, Department
of Biological Sciences, University of
Exeter, Exeter, UK, p. 2.

[^/68]: _See_ _M C Mehta vs Union of India_ (1996) 4 SCC 750.

[^/69]: \(1997) 11 SCC 327.

[^/70]: [http://www.ielrc.org/content/w0402.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20070606210840/http://www.ielrc.org/content/w0402.pdf)

[^/71]: _Almitra H. Patel v Union of India_ (2000) 2
SCC 679 at 685,

[^/72]: [http://www.ielrc.org/content/w0402.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20070606210840/http://www.ielrc.org/content/w0402.pdf)

[^/73]: _Ibid._

[^/74]: _Ibid._

[^/75]: For e.g., _see_ 'National Thermal Power
Corporation Limited; Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Policy' reproduced in Walter
Fernandes and Vijay Paranjpye, _Rehabilitation
Policy and Law in India: Right to Livelihood_,
Econet, Pune, Indian Social Institute, Delhi, 1997 at pp. 331--44. Four options are held out
for rehabilitation: land for land, cash
compensation, jobs in the industry to the extent
available and support for self-employment in
support services around the displaced industry.
