_One of the objectives of the 73rd Amendment was to give
certainty, continuity and strength to the panchayats. The
experiences of the functioning of the panchayats reveal that while
elections have been held regularly, barring a few states, the
states have been slow in devolving power to the panchayat bodies.
What should be the future line of action for further deepening
grass roots democracy to bring about socio-economic
transformation in rural India?_

\ 

The Constitution (73rd Amendment)
Act 1992, (hereafter referred to as
the _Central Act_) was a watershed
in the history of decentralised governance,
planning and development. It made
_panchayats_ the third tier of government
with reasonable substance and contents in
terms of powers and authority as well as
creating adequate space for women and
marginalised groups in the federal set-up.
Decentralised democracy was extended to
the fifth scheduled areas of states through
the provisions of the _panchayat_ (Extension
to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996
(hereafter referred to as _Extension Act_).
We have by now a decade of experience
of the functioning of _panchayati raj institutions_
(_PRIs_). Elections have been held
in a number of states for the second time
and in some states finance commissions
have also submitted their second reports
on _panchayat_ finances to state governments.
An assessment of the implementation
of the act and the functioning of the
_panchayats_ is in order. This paper seeks
to deal with these issues.

# _Central Act_ and _Extension Act_

The salient feature of the _Central Act_
are as follows:

(i) Formation of _gram sabha_
at village level;
(ii) Uniform three-tier
system at village, block and district levels
with exemption for intermediate level in
states with a population of less than two
million;
(iii) Direct election to all seats for
all members at all levels;
(iv) Indirect
elections of chairpersons at intermediate
and apex levels; however, mode of
election for the lowest level is left to the
state;
(v) Reservation on rotational basis
for the SCs and STs in proportion to their
population both for membership as well
as chairpersonships of _panchayats_ at all
levels;
(vi) Reservation of not less than
one-third of the seats and offices for
women;
(vii) Five-year term;
(viii) Fresh
elections within six months in case of
suppressions or dissolution;
(ix) Devolution
of powers and responsibilities by the
state in preparation and implementation
of plans for economic development and
social justice including implementation
of schemes relating to the subjects listed
in the Eleventh Schedule of the Act;
(x) Setting up state finance commission
after every five years to review the financial
position of these institutions and to
make suitable recommendations to the
state on the distribution of funds among
_panchayats_;
(xi) Setting up state election
commission for holding _panchayat elections_
under its superintendence, direction
and control;
(xii) Seventy-fourth Amendment
to the Constitution providing for constitution
of district planning committee to
prepare a draft plan of the whole district
comprising _panchayats_ and municipalities.

Although this provision is part of the 74th
Amendment Act, the states have agreed
to extend it to the 73rd Amendment Act.
Hence, for all practical purposes, it is also
assumed to be a part of the _Central Act_.

There are no two opinions about the fact
that the _Central Act_ gave birth to the third
generation of _panchayats_ in India. The
main lacuna of this act, however, is that
instead of clearly specifying the functions
and powers of _panchayats_, it has left it to
the discretion of state governments. It is
clear from the Article 243 G which says
that the legislature of a state may, by law,
endow the _panchayats_ with such powers
and authority as may be necessary to enable
them to function as institutions of self-government.
Such law may also contain
provisions for the devolution of powers
and responsibilities upon _panchayats_ at
the appropriate level subject to such conditions
as may be specified therein, with
respect to

(a) the preparation of plans for
economic development and social justice,
(b) the implementation of schemes for
economic development and social justice
as may be entrusted to them including
those in relation to the matters listed in
the Eleventh Schedule.

It is, however, not mandatory on the part
of the state government to implement this
because the word 'may' is used in five
times in this article. It implies that power-sharing
with _panchayats_ depends on the
political leadership at the state level. We
have the example of West Bengal where
_panchayat elections_ have been held since
the 1970s even before the amendment
because the political party in power had
the political will to deepen decentralised
democracy.

The salient features of the _Extension Act_
are as follows:

(i) Every village shall have
a _gram sabha_ consisting of persons whose
names are included in the electoral rolls
for the _panchayats_ at the village level;
(ii) Reservation for scheduled tribes
(STs)
shall not be less than half of the total
number of seats at all tiers of _panchayats_.
Reservation of tribal communities shall be
on the basis of proportion to their population.
The chairpersonship shall be reserved
for STs at all levels of _panchayats_.
In case some ST communities have no
representation at intermediate or district-level
_panchayats_, the state government
shall nominate such under-represented STs.
But such nomination should not exceed
one-tenth of the total number of elected
members of the _panchayats_;
(iii) Every
legislation on the _panchayats_ in Fifth
Scheduled Area shall be in conformity
with the customary law, social and religious
practices and traditional management
practice of the community resources;
(iv) _Gram sabha_ shall be competent to
safeguard and preserve the traditions and
customs of the people, their cultural identity,
community resources and customary
mode of dispute resolution;
(v) _Gram sabha_
is empowered to approve plans, programmes
and projects for social and
economic development, to identify persons
as beneficiaries under the poverty
alleviation and other programmes and to
give certificate of utilisation of funds for
various plans and programmes;
(vi) _Gram
sabha_ or _panchayat_ at the appropriate level
would be consulted before making the
acquisition of land for development projects
and before resettling or rehabilitating
persons affected by such projects. However,
actual planning and implementation
of the projects shall be coordinated at the
state level;
(vii) Recommendation of the
_gram sabha_ or the _panchayats_ at the appropriate
level is mandatory for the grant
of prospecting licence or mining lease for
minor minerals, and grant for the exploitation
of minor minerals by auction;
(viii) _Gram sabha_ and _panchayats_ are
endowed with powers to enforce prohibition
or to regulate or restrict the sale and
consumption of any intoxicant; ownership
of minor forest produce; to prevent alienation
of land; to manage village markets;
to exercise control over moneylending; to
exercise control over institutions and functionaries
in all social sectors; to exercise
control over local plans and resources for
such plans, including tribal sub-plans;
(ix) Planning and management of minor
water bodies shall be entrusted to the
_panchayats_ at the appropriate level;
(x) State legislatures may endow _panchayats_
with such powers and authorities,
as may be necessary to enable them to
function as institutions of self-government.
The statutes shall contain safeguards to
ensure that _panchayats_ at the higher level
do not assume the powers and authority
of any _panchayat_ at the lower level or of
the _gram sabha_. Hence, the cardinal principle
of allocation of functions has been
provided to a greater extent in the act itself;
(xi) State legislatures shall endeavour to
follow the pattern of the 6th Schedule of
the Constitution while designing administrative
arrangements in the _panchayats_ at
district level.

Thus, the _Extension Act_ is an important
step in enabling state legislatures to make
laws for the tribals that ensure their control
and rights over natural resources and
conserve and preserve their identity and
culture in a participatory manner through
the institution of the _gram sabha_.

# Implementation

While introducing the Constitution
(73rd) Amendment Bill in parliament on
December 1, 1992, the then rural development
minister observed that "this casts
a duty on the centre as well as the states
to establish and nourish the village
_panchayats_ so as to make them effective,
self-governing institutions"And by introducing
this act the government was fulfilling
Mahatma Gandhi's dream of gram swaraj,
he added.

We have seen that the _Central Act_ has
made _panchayats_ institutions of self-government.
Although, the term 'institution
of self-government' (_ISG_) has not
been defined in the act, the connotation is
well understood. In order to function as
_ISG_, the _panchayats_ have to fulfil three
basic conditions, namely,

(a) institutional
existence in the sense the decisions are
taken by the people's representatives;
(b) institutional capacity in the form of
empowering institutions to make their
rules independently; and
(c) financial
viability in terms of sufficiently empowering
_panchayats_ in raising resources to
meet their responsibilities. In other
words, the _panchayats_ should enjoy
functional, administrative and financial
autonomy.

The _statement of the objects and reasons_
of the bill says that the _Central Act_ was
brought into force with effect from April 24,
1993 in view of the "imperative need to
ensure in the Constitution certain basic
and essential features of _panchayati raj_
institutions to impart certainty, continuity
and strength to them". Let us see on the
basis of the experiences gained so far
since its enactment as to what extent certainty,
continuity and strength have been
imparted to them. The evaluation of the
functioning of the _panchayats_ can be
done on the basis of the holding of
_panchayat elections_ and the participation
of people in these elections, extent of
devolution of powers and responsibilities
on _panchayats_, constitution and functioning
of the district planning committees and
participation of marginalised people and
women in decision-making at local levels.
As per the _Central Act_, all states were
to amend or pilot fresh acts on _panchayats_
within a year. All the states have passed
their conformity acts within the stipulated
time. But it is disheartening to note that
although the states had one year to debate
seriously on the subject in their respective
assemblies and for formulating legislation
which could enable _panchayats_ to function
as _ISGs_, most states passed their respective
legislations only on the eve of the deadline.
This shows a lack of seriousness on the
part of the states in piloting their legislation
in conformity with the spirit of the
Constitution.

As per the _Central Act_, elections to all
tiers of the _panchayat_ had to be held within
six months of its coming into force.
However, Article 243(N) also allowed the
_panchayats_ to complete their full term, if
they were constituted immediately before
enforcement of the _Central Act_. All the
states and union territories (_UTs_) covered under the _Central
Act_ have constituted _panchayats_ except
Arunachal Pradesh, Jharkhand and
Pondicherry. But elections were not held
in time in a number of states. It has, however,
been seen that in most of the cases the delay
in holding elections was due to court cases,
natural calamities or law and order problems.
The working group on decentralised
planning and _panchayati raj_ for the Tenth
Plan observed that "... most of the court
cases, grievances of aggrieved parties
related to reservation of seats for SCs/STs/
OBCs/women, delimitation of constituencies,
percentage of reservation of chairpersons
of lower tier to higher tier, etc. In most
of the cases, state governments have not
pursued these pending court cases vigorously
for their early hearing so that a final
decision of the courts become available as
early as possible" \[GoI 2001b\]. It reflects
the apathy of the states in ensuring early
participation of women and marginalised
groups in local decision-making bodies at
the local level.

But on the other hand, villagers took
active part wherever _panchayat elections_
were held. This is evident from the fact
that in the _panchayat elections_ in Andhra
Pradesh (August 2001) and Goa (October 2000)
voting percentage was about 70 per
cent. In Haryana in 2000 it was more than
80 per cent. In Karnataka, it ranged between
50 and 84 per cent. It shows that
during the decade continuity has been
ensured to the _panchayats_ to a great extent,
Article 243 G of the Constitution envisaged
_panchayats_ as _ISGs_, which means
that they should enjoy functional, financial
and administrative autonomy. Let us discuss
briefly the extent to which the
_panchayats_ have emerged as _ISGs_ in their
functioning.

## Transfer of Functions

The basic principle (that is, what can be
done at a particular level should be done at
that level only) has not been adhered to
by the states while allocating functions
among the three tiers of _panchayats_. As
mentioned earlier, the state governments
were supposed to transfer to _panchayats_
functions pertaining to 29 subjects listed in
the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution.
However, of the states and _UTs_, only
Karnataka, Kerala, Rajasthan, Sikkim,
Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, and Daman and
Diu have transferred 29 subjects. Arunachal
Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Jharkhand, Goa,
Gujarat, Andaman and Nicobar Island,
Chandigarh and Pondicherry have not
devolved any function. The remaining
states and _UTs_ have transferred only some
functions (Table 1) ranging from three in
Dadra and Nagar Haveli to 25 functions
in Orissa. As is evident from Table 1,
although several states have given a number
of responsibilities to the _panchayats_
these have not been put into practice. This,
in turn, has adversely affected the efficiency
and effectiveness of the _panchayats_.
The working group on decentralised planning
rightly observed that "... items listed
as responsibilities in the states are couched
in vague terms. A glance of the variety of
these items reveals that they are a shopping
list of sectors and sub sectors, broad activities
in a sub-sector and activities in sub-activities/specific
responsibilities under a
broad activity, with no role clarity ... in
some states the line departments still
exercise the powers of supervision and
control over the schemes of subjects transferred
to the _panchayats_" \[GoI 2001b\].


+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| States/UTs        | Funds* | Functions* | Functionaries* | Funds† | Functions† | Functionaries† |
+===================+=======:+===========:+===============:+=======:+===========:+===============:+
| Andhra Pradesh    | 5      | 13         | 2              | 24     | 16         | 27             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Arunachal Pradesh | 0      | 0          | 0              | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Assam             | 0      | 0          | 0              | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Bihar             | 0      | 0          | 0              | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Jharkhand         | 0      | 0          | 0              | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Goa               | 0      | 0          | 0              | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Gujarat           | 0      | 0          | 0              | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Haryana           | 0      | 16         | 0              | 29     | 13         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Himachal Pradesh  | 2      | 23         | 7              | 27     | 6          | 22             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Karnataka         | 29     | 29         | 29             | 0      | 0          | 0              |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Kerala            | 15     | 29         | 15             | 14     | 0          | 14             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Madhya Pradesh    | 10     | 23         | 9              | 19     | 6          | 20             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Chhattisgarh      | 10     | 23         | 9              | 19     | 6          | 20             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Maharashtra       | 18     | 18         | 18             | 11     | 11         | 11             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Manipur           | 0      | 22         | 4              | 29     | 7          | 25             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Orissa            | 5      | 25         | 3              | 24     | 4          | 26             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Punjab            | 0      | 7          | 0              | 29     | 22         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Rajasthan         | 0      | 29         | 0              | 29     | 0          | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Sikkim            | 29     | 29         | 29             | 0      | 0          | 0              |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Tamil Nadu        | 0      | 29         | 0              | 29     | 0          | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Tripura           | 0      | 12         | 0              | 29     | 17         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Uttar Pradesh     | 12     | 13         | 9              | 17     | 16         | 20             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Uttaranchal       | 12     | 13         | 9              | 17     | 16         | 20             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| West Bengal       | 12     | 29         | 12             | 17     | 0          | 17             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| A and N Islands   | 0      | 3          | 0              | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Chandigarh        | 0      | 29         | 0              | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| D and N Haveli    | 0      | 3          | 3              | 29     | 26         | 26             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Daman and Diu     | 0      | 29         | 0              | 29     | 0          | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| NCT Delhi‡        | NA     | NA         | NA             | NA     | NA         | NA             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Lakshadweep       | 0      | 6          | 29             | 29     | 23         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
| Pondicherry       | 0      | 0          | 29             | 29     | 29         | 29             |
+-------------------+--------+------------+----------------+--------+------------+----------------+
: Table 1 --- Statewise Status of Devolution of Departments/Subjects to _PRIs_

\* No of Department/Subjects Transferred to _Panchayats_ with

† No of Departments/Subjects Yet to be Transferred to _Panchayats_ with

‡ Panchayati raj system is yet to be revived

\ 

_Source_: GoI (2001b).

\ 

On the issue of functional devolution on
_panchayats_, the task force on _PRIs_ observed:
"In state like Andhra Pradesh, the
state government is implementing even a
decentralised programme like Janmabhoomi
programme mainly through
bureaucratic apparatus, which is against the
spirit of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment
Act. It has a content of people's
participation and social mobilisation, but
it bypasses the _panchayati raj_ bodies and
in fact this programme poses a serious
challenge to the system of _panchayati raj_
due to its poor involvement in this
programme. The state government of
Haryana had set up _village development
committees_ which negate the provisions of
73rd Constitutional Amendment Act regarding
reservation of SC, women and
seems to replace the elected _gram panchayat_"
\[GoI 2001\]. Addressing an all-India
conference on the role of the voluntary
sector in national development organised
by the Planning Commission on April 20,
2002, the chief minister of Haryana described
_gram vikas samities_ (village
development committees) as innovative
bodies set up by his government. "These
samitis comprising village sarpanch, panch,
representatives of women and minorities
who would not like to be involved in
electoral politics decide the development
priorities and actions in the village. He
clarified that these are voluntary bodies
and not 'parallel' to _panchayats_ but
strengthen the _panchayats_ by involving
the committees at _gram sabha_ level"
\[GoI 2002b\].

## Financial Devolution

Giving functions to _panchayats_ without
providing adequate funds is meaningless.
This in fact happened with the state
_panchayat acts_. Before listing the functions
to be performed by the _panchayats_,
the states have introduced certain qualifying
clauses. In Andhra Pradesh. Haryana
and Tamil Nadu, it is "within the limit of
its funds". In Punjab, it is "to the extent
its funds allow to perform". In Himachal
Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh , it is "as far
as the _gram panchayat_ funds at its disposal".
This presents a hazy picture about
the finances of _panchayats_ because it is the
resources at their disposal that determine
their role in performing developmental
activities in their respective areas of
operation. Gujarat and Karnataka have
_panchayat_-friendly provisions in this regard.
In Gujarat, as per Section 204, if the
income of a _gram panchayat_ is not commensurate
with its functions, the _taluk
panchayat_ shall take necessary steps to
provide resources to enable it to perform
its functions effectively. The _Karnataka
Panchayat Act_ provides for a grant arrangement
for the _gram panchayat_ under
which a grant of Rsl lakh is to be given
to it by the state government (Section 208).
The Constitution has the provision to set
up state finance commissions (_SFCs_). All
the states constituted the first state finance
commissions in the mid-1990s and submitted
their recommendations.

On the issue of the role of the state
finance commissions in financially empowering
_panchayats_, the mid-term appraisal
of the Ninth Plan observed that
"more buoyant taxes like sales tax and
excise are kept out of the purview of _PRIs_.
All _SFCs_ have put great emphasis on
interval revenue mobilisation but none has
suggested any effective mechanism for
_PRIs_ to generate their own revenue ... The
SFC reports have paid less attention to
issues of autonomy, financial management
and auditing procedures. The main deficiency
of the report lies in the fact that the
recommendations are not based on a clear
statement of the spending responsibilities
of local bodies. Indeed, the absence of
attention to the elementary principle, that
expenditure assignment must precede any
tax or revenue assignment, has made most
of the SFC's recommendations suspect"
\[GoI 2000\]. The working group on the
state resources commented that "the suggestions
of the first generation _SFCs_ if
fully implemented will go a long way in
improving the revenue generation capacity
of the local bodies. However, the _SFCs_
have failed to take a comprehensive view
of the resource sharing between the state
and local bodies or to link them with the
functional responsibilities of these bodies.
The fiscal domain of the local bodies still
remains limited and unsettled. The state
governments have also been slow and
hesitant in accepting the recommendations
of the _SFCs_" \[GoI 2002a\].

Only two states, Karnataka and Sikkim,
have devolved funds to the _panchayats_ for
all the 29 subjects listed in the 11th Schedule
of the Constitution. The states and _UTs_
of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
Jharkhand, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana,
Manipur, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura, Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli,
Daman and Diu, Lakshadweep and
Pondicherry have not devolved any funds
pertaining to these subjects to the
_panchayats_. The rest of the states have
devolved funds ranging from two in
Himachal Pradesh to 18 subjects in
Maharashtra (Table 1).

The report of the task force on devolution
of powers and functions to the _PRIs_,
brought out by the ministry of rural development
admitted that "the mandatory
provisions of the 73rd Amendment Act are
yet to be implemented in letter and spirit
by most of the states/_UTs_ even eight years
after the said act brought into force in April
1993" \[GoI 2001a\]. This report calculated
the total annual plan outlay under the
centrally sponsored/central sector schemes
and annual plan outlay of the state plans
partly or wholly pertaining to 29 subjects
indicated in the 11th Schedule of the
Constitution. An amount of Rs 40,818.65
crore was calculated as plan outlay for
annual plan 2000--2001 for the schemes/
programmes of the state governments under
the subjects listed in the 11th Schedule of
the Constitution (Table 2). It may also be
seen from the table that the scheme/programme
wise outlay ranges from
Rs 4.64 crore for plantations to Rs 8,128.44
crore for roads and bridges. In between
there are 11 schemes/programmes under
them whose annual outlay was more than
Rs 1,000 crore. Similarly, Rs 31,575.87
crore plan outlay has been earmarked for
annual plan 2000--01 for the schemes/programmes
of central ministries under
the subjects listed in the 11th Schedule of
the Constitution (Table 3). It may be seen
from this table that the outlay under different
schemes/programmes ranges from
Rs1.20 crore under the nutrition scheme
to Rs 5,548.15 crore under roads and
bridges scheme. There are nine schemes/programmes
under which annual outlay
was more than Rs 1,000 crore. A huge
amount of Rs 72,394.52 crore, which
legitimately belongs to the _panchayats_ has
been controlled either by the central or
state governments.

+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Name of Scheme/Programme            | Outlay   |
+=====================================+=========:+
| Crop husbandry                      | 1268.77  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Soil and water conservation         | 643.5    |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Animal husbandry                    | 354.19   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Dairy development                   | 49.87    |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Fisheries                           | 205.95   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Forestry and wildlife               | 1393.03  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Plantations                         | 4.63     |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Agricultural research and education | 292.21   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Agricultural finance institutions   | 61.63    |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Other agricultural programmes       | 98.18    |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| IRDP and allied programme           | 516.16   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| NREP/JRY                            | 1161.22  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Other programmes like EAS, etc      | 1062.46  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Land reform                         | 294.08   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Minor irrigation                    | 1907.93  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Non conventional sources of energy  | 119.43   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Village and small industries        | 800.87   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Roads and bridges                   | 8128.44  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Road transport                      | 1265.3   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Inland water transport              | 16.74    |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Other transport services            | 614.5    |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| General education                   | 4972.07  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Technical education                 | 422.49   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Art and culture                     | 171.07   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Medical and public health           | 3306.64  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Water supply and sanitation         | 6031.74  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Housing                             | 1936.57  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Welfare of Scs, STs and OBCs        | 1972.99  |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Social welfare                      | 904.26   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Nutrition                           | 721.79   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Other social services               | 119.86   |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
| Total                               | 40818.65 |
+-------------------------------------+----------+
: Table 2 --- Plan Outlay (in _Rs Crore_) for Annual Plan 2000--01 for Schemes/Programmes of State Governments as per Eleventh Schedule

\ 

_Note_: The outlay mentioned against each scheme/programme
is the sum of the outlays for all
the state governments allocated against
each of their schemes.

\ 

_Source_: GoI \[2001a\].

\ 


+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Name of Scheme/Programme                | Outlay   |
+=========================================+=========:+
| Crop husbandry                          | 1380.22  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Soil and water conservation             | 63.42    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Animal husbandry                        | 77.07    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Dairy development                       | 36.45    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Fisheries                               | 116.61   |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Forestry and wildlife                   | 281.65   |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Plantations                             | 169.35   |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Agricultural research and education     | 550      |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Other agricultural programmes           | 28.76    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Other agricultural programmes           | 6.67     |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Land reforms                            | 67.5     |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Minor irrigation                        | 88.67    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Non-conventional sources of energy      | 858.46   |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Village and small industries            | 1125.35  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Road and bridges                        | 5548.15  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| General education                       | 4433.06  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Technical education                     | 496.18   |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Family welfare                          | 3200     |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Water supply and sanitation             | 2071.03  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Housing                                 | 3869.73  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Welfare of SC, ST and OBCs              | 997.74   |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Social security and welfare             | 2231.85  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Nutrition                               | 2.9      |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Other social services                   | 1.2      |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Special programme for rural development | 1075.45  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Rural employment                        | 2798.4   |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
| Total                                   | 31575.87 |
+-----------------------------------------+----------+
: Table 3 --- Plan Outlay(in _Rs crore_) for Annual Plan 2000--01 for Schemes/Programmes of Central Ministries as per Eleventh Schedule

\ 

_Source: GoI 2001a._

\ 

Another important issue relates to the
finance of the _panchayats_ pertaining to
their own contribution through tax and
non-tax measures. The report of the working
group on state resources has thrown
light on this issue. Table 4 shows that own
revenue (both tax and non-tax) of the _PRIs_
as GDP ratios has been declining. The
decline is sharper in the case of revenue
from tax in comparison with non-tax.
Hence, besides transferring resources from
central and state governments through
various schemes and other constitutional
mechanism such as central finance commission,
state finance commission, the
_panchayats_ must mobilise their own resources
for acquiring fiscal autonomy
which is an essential ingredient to enable
them to function as _ISGs_. The working
group on state resources commented that
"simple reluctance to mobilise, lack of role
clarity as between tiers, lack of staff support,
unviable administrative area, creation
of parallel channels of flow of funds like
MP funds, MLA funds, state-sponsored
schemes independent of _PRIs_ like
_Janmabhoomi_ in Andhra Pradesh are
among the major factors explaining low
revenue levels of local bodies. There are
states like Bihar and Tripura which have
not collected any money from _PRIs_" \[GoI
2002a\]. It is clear that a large amount of
funds pertaining to the 29 subjects listed
in the 11th Schedule of the Constitution
is still in the control of the central and state
governments. But the other side of the
picture is that the _panchayats_ have not used
the provisions contained in the State
_Panchayat Acts_ for mobilising both tax
and non-tax revenue at their levels.

+-----------+-------+-----------+
| Year      | Tax † | Non-Tax † |
+===========+======:+==========:+
| 1997-98   | 0.025 | 0.02      |
+-----------+-------+-----------+
| 2002-2003 | 0.023 | 0.019     |
+-----------+-------+-----------+
| 2006-07   | 0.021 | 0.018     |
+-----------+-------+-----------+
: Table 4 --- _PRIs_ Own Revenue-GDP Ratios

\ 

† _Panchayati Raj Institutions_

\ 

_Source_: GoI (2002a).

\ 

## Transfer of Functionaries

Here too, the state _panchayat acts_ present
a gloomy picture. These acts provide power
for inspection, inquiring into their affairs,
suspension of _panchayat_ resolutions, and
issuing directions to state governments.
These provisions are more draconian than
_Article 356_ of the Constitution for the
removal of state government by the centre.
The states should know that charity begins
at home. Besides, in most states the key
functionaries, namely, secretaries and
executive officers at all levels of _panchayats_
are state government employees. For ensuring
administrative autonomy, the
_panchayats_ should have their own service
cadre. In Tripura, for recalling a state
government employee, a resolution to that
effect has to be passed by a majority of
the members of the _panchayat_.

Only two states, namely Karnataka and
Sikkim, have transferred functionaries
pertaining to all the 29 subjects to the
_panchayats_. Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Jharkhand, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh
and Pondicherry have not transferred any
functionaries to the _panchayats_. The rest
of the states and _UTs_ have transferred
functionaries of some departments/subjects
ranging from two in Andhra Pradesh to 18
in Maharasthra (Table 1). It is also pertinent
to mention that many officials of
state governments posted at the district and
sub-district levels did not want to work
under the administrative control of the
elected _panchayats_. In fact, the problem
lies elsewhere. We shall discuss this issue
in the section on tasks ahead.

The discussion on functions, finances
and functionaries (triple Fs) of _panchayats_
shows that, with some exceptions the status
of the _panchayats_ in terms of making
them autonomous in the areas of their
operation remains the same as it was before
the introduction of the _central act_.

The district planning committees (_DPCs_)
are to be constituted as per _Article 243ZD_
of the Constitution for integrating rural
and urban plans prepared by _panchayats_
and municipalities and also to take into
consideration spatial planning, sharing
of water and other physical and natural
resources, integrated development of
infrastructure and environment conservation
in the district. These important functions
of the committee could have facilitated
interface between municipalities and
_panchayats_. An attempt has thus been made
to integrate rural and urban areas, which
is essential for preparing a meaningful
plan of the district as a whole. But even
after the passing of a decade of the conformity
legislation by the states, many of
them are yet to constitute _DPCs_. Table 5
depicts the progress made towards constituting
_DPCs_. It is clear from this table that
only 11 states, namely, Haryana (only in
four districts) Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil
Nadu, Tipura, Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal and three union territories, namely,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Daman
and Diu and Lakshadweep have taken
action to constitute _DPCs_.


+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| States/UTs        | Status of Constitution of DPCs                                                                                      |
+===================+=====================================================================================================================+
| Andhra Pradesh    | Not constituted                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Arunachal Pradesh | Not constituted                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Assam             | Not constituted                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Bihar             | Not constituted                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Goa               |                                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Gujarat           | Not constituted                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Haryana           | Only in four districts. Rest under consideration                                                                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Himachal Pradesh  | Not yet but it is under consideration                                                                               |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| J and K           | Not applicable                                                                                                      |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Karnataka         | Yes, In 17 out of 20 districts. After reorganisation, there are 27 districts. All DPCs will be reconstituted now    |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Kerala            | Yes, chairperson of DP is chairperson of DPC                                                                        |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Madhya Pradesh    | Yes, district in charge ministers are chairpersons responsibilities of district government given to the DPCs        |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Maharashtra       | Not constituted                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Manipur           | Yes, in 2 districts.                                                                                                |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Meghalaya         | Not applicable                                                                                                      |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Mizoram           | Not applicable                                                                                                      |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Nagaland          | Not applicable                                                                                                      |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Orissa            | Yes, chairperson of DP is chairperson of DPC                                                                        |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Punjab            | Not yet but constitution is under active consideration                                                              |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Rajasthan         | Yes, ZP president is chairperson of DPC                                                                             |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Sikkim            | Yes                                                                                                                 |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Tamil Nadu        | Yes, will become operational after election of members from panchayats and municipalities. DP is chairperson of DPC |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Tripura           | Yes, cabinet-rank ministers are chairpersons                                                                        |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Uttar Pradesh     | Yes, ministers are chairpersons                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| West Bengal       | Yes, chairperson of DP is chairperson of DPC                                                                        |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| A and N Islands   | Yes                                                                                                                 |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Chandigarh        | Not in favour as 90 per cent of population covered by municipality                                                  |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| D and N Haveli    | Yes                                                                                                                 |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Daman and Diu     |                                                                                                                     |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| NCT Delhi         | State PR Act is under suspension                                                                                    |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Lakshadweep       | Yes, chief development commissioner is chairperson                                                                  |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Pondicherry       | Election not held                                                                                                   |
+-------------------+---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+
:Table 5 --- Statewise Status of District Planning Committees

\ 

_Source_: GoI (2001b).

\ 

In many states, these committees are
chaired by ministers and officers of the
state government. This is against the spirit
of the 73rd Constitutional Amendment
Act. If these committees are chaired by
the ministers and officers of the state
governments, there would be little initiative
available at the local level for
planning and implementing development
schemes.

The _Extension Act_ has not only made
the _gram sabha_ a strong body, but also put
'jal, jungle and jamin' (water, forest and
land) under its control. All the states, barring
Jharkhand, have enacted state legislation
in conformity with the _Extension Act_ (GoI
2001). The state legislature should have
kept in mind the following aspects while
amending their respective _panchayat acts_:

(i) _Gram sabha_ should be made the corner
stone of the entire system of _PRIs_ by way
of according to freedom in managing,
protecting and preserving natural resources
and through formulation of socio-economic
development programmes, projects and
schemes for tribal people;
(ii) Relationship
between the _gram sabha_ and _panchayats_
should be similar to the one between legislatures
and the government. In other words,
_panchayats_ should take the approval of the
_gram sabha_ in all matters affecting rural
economy and society;
(iii)The underlying
spirit of the _Extension Act_ is that of devolution
of powers and authority (rather than
delegation of powers) to the _gram sabha_
which represents participatory democracy
rather than empowering representatives of
decentralised democracy in the form of
gram _panchayats_ and higher tiers of
_panchayati raj_ system

And while devolving
powers and authority on _panchayat_ or
_gram sabha_, the state legislature should
ensure that _panchayats_ at the higher level
do not assume the powers and authority
of any _panchayat_ at the lower level or of
the _gram sabha_ \[Mahi Pal 2000\].

But most states have not kept these
principles in mind while enacting their
conformity legislation. States have not gone
into the spirit of this legislation and have
tried to manipulate the provisions in a
narrow way. It has been rightly commented
on by the mid-term appraisal of the Ninth
Plan. "Implementation of the law has been
severely hampered by the reluctance of
most state governments to make laws and
rules that conform to the spirit of the law.
What is perceived as weak-kneed political
will has led to bureaucratic creativity in
minimalistic interpretations of the law"
\[GoI 2000\].

However, keeping in view the provisions
of the concerned state acts, it may
be said that conformity acts of Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh
are comparatively more in conformation
with the letter and spirit of the _Extension
Act_. In order to implement the _Extension
Act_ in the right perspective, amendments
in its related legislations such as Land
Acquisition Act, Excise Act, Irrigation Act,
Land Revenue Code/Act, SC/ST Land
Alienation Act, Moneylenders Act and
Regulated Market Act are required to be
addressed now.

## Marginalised Groups and Women

Political space is provided for marginalised
groups and women in _panchayats_
and for subsequent exposure to
decentralised governance, planning
development, and capacity building to some
extent through imparting training. Besides,
exposure to local governance by NGOs
has given them some confidence in taking
up leadership challenges in preparing and
executing plans for economic development
and social justice at the grass roots level.
The findings of a study of the working of
_panchayats_ in six states conducted by PRIA
reveals that: "... 25 per cent women notice
and remark on the visible change in their
status within their family after they have
been elected ... about 60 percent of women
said that they would encourage women to
stand for election. The same percentage
(60 per cent) is contemplating to contest
_PRI_ election again" \[PRIA 2000\].

The working group on decentralised
planning and _PRIs_ observed on this issue
that "One of the significant achievements
of the provisions of the 73rd Amendment
Act concerning reservation of seats and
political offices in favour of women and
the disadvantaged sections of the rural
community is that it had improved their
awareness and perception levels and has
created an urge in them to assert their
rightful share in the decision-making process
at the local level" \[GoI 2001\].

Thus, the affirmative action for these
groups in local governance has resulted in
social identities and political awareness
among them and created an urge to become
part of mainstream political, economic and
social life. With initial clashes between
'higher' castes and 'lower castes, there
are indications of social cohesion at local
levels. The political space given to marginalised
sections has, to some extent dealt
a blow to the asymmetrical social structure
at the local level and given greater space
for their participation and involvement in
decision-making \[Mahi Pal 2001\].

# Task Ahead

A two-pronged strategy comprising
constitutional amendment and social mobilisation
appears imperative as a task ahead
for strengthening the _panchayats_ in the
light of the experiences gained in the past
decade. The constitutional amendment
should aim at removing discrepancies in
the allocation of functions, finances and
functionaries and establishing organic links
between and among the three tiers of the
_panchayats_ and composition of the _DPC_.
It should also be kept in mind that constitutional
amendment alone cannot be effective
if demand for _de facto_ decentralisation
does not arise from the grass roots. For this,
social mobilisation is required. Although
NGOs have been organising training programmes
for capacity-building of _panchayats_,
they have neither been able to
create an environment for social mobilisation
norinitiate social movements by themselves
because of their operational constraints.
Social mobilisation could be done
only through a social movement for greater
autonomy of the _panchayats_ in discharging
their responsibilities. In this context, no
initiative has been taken by the elected
representatives of _PRIs_ to organise themselves
for putting pressure on governments.

However, various _panchayat_ '_sammelans_'
(conferences) have been organised
in the last decade. The _all-India panchayat
adhyakshas sammelan_ organised by the
central government on April 5--6, 2002
with the purpose of building a consensus
on the measures required to strengthen the
_panchayati raj_ system has been the most
recent one in the series. The _sammelan_ has
made a number of suggestions in order to
make _panchayats_ effective institutions. One
of these was that: "All state governments
shall take action to devolve funds, functions
and functionaries to the _panchayati
raj_ institutions (_PRIs_) before December 31,
2002". But no concrete steps have been
taken up by the states for implementing
this recommendation. Had this _sammelan_
been organised by the elected leadership
of the _panchayats_, there could have been
some positive development. A Hindi saying
aptly describes the real state of the _PRI_
bodies: 'Panchos kee baat seer matha pay,
patnala yahi giraga' (We appreciate your
point of view but status quo will remain).

Consequently, pressure for greater autonomy
for the _panchayats_ is not coming
from the grass roots because on the one
hand the villagers do not consider _panchayats_
as their problem-solving institutions,
and on the other hand, elected representatives
of the _panchayats_ consider themselves
helpless in solving people's problems
due to lack of control with them on
issues affecting the villagers. In other
words, the demand side of the _panchayati
raj_ in terms of asking for more power by
the _panchayats_ is badly lacking. Until the
political parties are prepared to accept
effective decentralisation as one of the issues
in their election manifestos, the _panchayats_
will remain at the mercy of the central and
state governments even after another
amendment. Hence, both planks of the
strategy for empowerment of the _panchayats_
have to be applied simultaneously
for better results in future.

# References

::: {#refs}

GoI (2000): Mid-Term Appraisal of the Ninth FiveYear
Plan (1997--2002), Government of India,
Planning Commission, October, pp 175--76.

\ 

______ (2001): 'Report of the Task Force on _Panchayati
Raj_ Institutions (_PRIs_)', Planning Commission,
December, p 9.

\ 

______ (2001a): 'Report of the Task Force on Devolution
of Powers and Functions Upon _Panchayati Raj_
Institutions', Ministry of Rural Development,
August, p 2.

\ 

______ (2001b): 'The Report of the Working Group
on Decentralised Planning and _Panchayati
Raj_ Institutions for the Tenth Five Year
Plan (2002--07)', Planning Commission,
November, p 9.

\ 

______ (2002a): 'Report of the Working Group on
States' Resources for the Tenth Five-Year
Plan (2002--2007)', Volume II, Planning
Commission, January, p 93.

\ 

______ (2002b): 'All-India Conference on the Role of
the Voluntary Sector in National Development
(proceedings)', April, 20, Planning Commission,
p 7.

\ 

Mahi Pal (2000); '_Panchayats_ in the Fifth
Scheduled Areas', _Economic and Political
Weekly_, May 6--12.

\ 

______ (2001): 'Eighty-Seventh Amendment Bill: Where
Are We Heading', _Economic and Political
Weekly_, May 26, p 1783.

\ 

PRIA (2000): '_Panchayati Raj Institutions_: A
Balance Sheet', February.

:::
