_The mainstream paradigm of understanding grass-root
environmentalism in India as "environmentalism of the
poor" might be challenged by an alternative prototype
forest movement in the Bengal Dooars prior to the
_Chipko movement_. It was fought against the exploitative
design of ecosystem governance under the _taungya_
method of artificial regeneration as invented by colonial
foresters during the British rule. The movement is
historic and mostly relevant in its radical gesture against
ecological exploitation through inclusive technique of
community involvement in the top-down management
of forest resources._

\ 

The _Chipko movement_ is commonly appreciated as the
starting point of the environmental movement in post-colonial
India. Ranged between 1973 and 1980, it initially
started against the "blatant injustice" of allotment of ash trees for
commercial purpose by the forest department instead of providing
these to the peasants for making their agricultural implements.
The resistance later turned its attention to wider environmental
concerns like protection and management of forests by the communities
against commercial forestry and recourse to environmentally
and socially just "alternative technologies" against industrial-urban
orientation of the modern development process
(Guha 1989:152--84). The movement gave impetus to a series of
popular protests throughout the country around ecological issues
and inspired the intellectuals and academics to conceptualise
Indian environmentalism as the "environmentalism of the poor"
which refers to the struggle of the local communities against
"partial or total dispossession" from their resource base by the
commercial-industrial interests while their "own patterns of
utilisation were (and are) less destructive of the environment"
(Guha and Martinez-Alier 2000:5). While not underestimating
the practical and theoretical contribution of _Chipko_, its conventional
position as the pioneer environmental movement might be
challenged by a historical movement of the forest villagers in
Dooars of North Bengal. The movement started in 1967 and
unlike _Chipko_ it was not a result of "ecological distribution conflicts"
but emanated from the exploitative design of natural
resource governance through co-option of the forest dwellers. It
was indebted to the radical peasants and workers' movement in
Bengal and was essentially inspired by Subhash Chandra Bose's
ideals, techniques and nationalist spirit of struggle. The movement
is mostly relevant in its focus against ecological exploitation
while going beyond the paradigm of distributive justice and
principle of recognition, particularly when newer inclusive techniques
of ecological exploitation through collaboration or cooperation
of the ecosystem people are being employed in the
management of forest resources.

# Advent of _Taungya_

The Dooars Valley in Jalpaiguri district, West Bengal, known as
the gateway to Bhutan and the north-eastern states of India, and
which stretches from the Teesta River on the west to the Sankosh
River on the east was the birthplace of this historic movement.
British intervention in the Dooars forest in 1866[^/1] and the simultaneous
introduction of systematic forestry, which began in India
after 1857 was the ecological impetus to this movement. In
Dooars like in other parts of Bengal initially the forest was under
the revenue department and remained open for "indiscriminate
felling". After 1874 with the creation of the forest department the
forest tracts became "reserved" and were divided into Jalpaiguri
and Buxa forest divisions with the Torsa River as the border separating
them (Karlsson 1997:97--99). The colonial model of systematic
extraction of timber from reserved forests in the region
for construction of railway sleepers to tea boxes and warships to
office panelling facilitated the rise of resource production of particular
timber species and its preservation. Fire prevention thus
became the main concern of forest conservancy in Dooars especially
to protect the sal (_shorea robusta_) with the objective of
keeping other biotic influences like grazing out of the identified
forest tract. However, this negatively affected the practice of
so-called _scientific forestry_ and soon it was found that the prescribed
system of management of sal was not yielding the desired
result in Jalpaiguri and Buxa divisions due to very different forest
conditions as compared to the other regions of the country
(Sivaramakrishnan 2000:73). In this high rainfall zone the prevention
of fire led to the tremendous undergrowth of a new semi-evergreen
species which crowded old sal trees and severely
impeded the growth of new sal seedlings (Karlsson 1997:108).

Against this backdrop a radical solution was found by the then
British foresters working in Dooars like Hart, E O Shebbeare and
J W A Grieve who argued in favour of introduction of clearing the
land by fire after clear-felling the forest tract for artificial regeneration
of sal plants. This new method originated from the practices
of the shifting cultivators rather than scientific knowledge
and had been used by Dietrich Brandis in regeneration of teak in
the Burmese Highland where it was known as _taungya_ meaning
hill (_taung_) cultivation (_ya_). In this system the woody plant component
was burnt to improve soil fertility and plantations were
established in the cleared forestland (Nair 1993:75). The introduction
of _taungya_ in Dooars reinforced the necessity for restructuring
the forest village system as a whole because under the new
system skilled labour which knew the technique of slash and
burn was required. Hence, the indigenous shifting cultivators
like Rava, Mech or Garo whom the British forester threw out
from the forests earlier in the fire prevention regime were back in
the newly established forest villages. In these newly created
_taungya_ villages the residents were allowed to raise agricultural
crops for two years in clear-felled coups between the lines of
forest plantation. As soon as the crops grew to shade the space
between the tree seedlings, the villagers had to discontinue cultivation
and move to a new site of plantation.

Along with plantation, the villagers were involved in associated
weeding, cleaning, thinning operations and had to save
the plantation from fire and grazing hazards for four to five
years. In exchange they were entitled to certain privileges and
facilities granted by an annual agreement or bond with the
forest department like free timber and other implements for
building quarters, drinking water, limited medical assistance,
free firewood and fodder in addition to cultivable land of not
more than five acres and cash payment for extra work. The
system continued even after two decades of independence and
remained the crux of forest conservation and regeneration until
the historic movement put an end to this exploitative exercise of
production forestry.

# Political Ecology of Exploitation

_Taungya_ achieved striking success from the viewpoint of forest
management as it successfully turned the destructive practice of
shifting cultivation into a method of regeneration where natural
regeneration has failed due to locational peculiarities in the
ecosystem. It was low cost due to the free labour supply in forest
plantations. Considering its success, anthropologists perceived
_taungya_ either as a revolution in the environmental history of the
Dooars (Karlsson 1997) or as a site for recognition of the local
forestry knowledge under the colonial framework of _scientific
forestry_ (Sivaramakrishnan 2000). These approaches, however,
focused implicitly or explicitly on the structural arrangement of
cooperation as a hallmark of the system where the forest department
accommodates both the shifting cultivators and their skill
in the collaborative framework of natural resource management
and extends certain privileges and facilities to them in lieu of
their service for forest regeneration. But, from the viewpoint of
everyday praxis those assessments on _taungya_ have failed to
understand the political ecology of exploitation inherent as an
essential property of the system where the much projected
vocabulary of cooperation has been transformed into a mechanism
of usurpation.

Under the _taungya_, no customary rights of the forest dwellers
were recognised in the region. The forest villagers were denied a
choice in the matter of field crops they were entitled to cultivate
in between plantations. They did not have any authority to
choose the species to be planted and there was no scope for negotiation
with the forest department relating to the facilities and
privileges usually offered to them. The forest villagers had to sign
an agreement with the department to work 90 days free of wages
and up to 275 days on meagre daily wages without any arrangement
for their children's education, drinking water and supply of
working implements.[^/2] All the members of the family, including
the women and children were made to work without any remuneration.[^/3]
In some cases, when the villagers were granted homestead
lands under the system, prolonged or permanent occupancy
of the land was impossible because they had to shift to new
locations after every plantation cycle. Hence all those initiatives
for incorporation of those useful indigenous tribes and recognition
of their knowledge were nothing but to fulfil the gap of the
colonial knowledge and practice of ecosystem management to
cherish the empire's interests and purposes.

The political ecology of exploitation under _taungya_ involved
both the ecosystem and its people. The first kind of exploitation
manifested in the choice of principle timber species like sal, teak,
etc, for regeneration as well as conservation at the cost of multi-species
forest ecosystem which eventually encouraged the mono-cultural
plantations by destroying the diversity of the forestland.
The next type of exploitation was that of the service of those
ecosystem people in order to extract values from nature to serve
the ruling interest. The mechanism of a co-option worked successfully
behind the usurpation of their service. First, villagers
were encouraged to do intercropping which contributed to the
preparation of land involving the associated process of weeding,
cleaning and burning for forest plantation without being paid.
Second, protection of the plantation from the attack of wild animals
automatically took place with the initiative of the villagers
to save their own crops. Third, the system of uninterrupted, compulsory
and free labour in lieu of granting certain facilities made
the foresters free from headache to carry out their managerial
success in forestry operation. The nature of exploitation under
the system was beautifully exposed by a former Inspector General
of Forests in India in a report compiled for Food and Agricultural
Organisation (FAO) of the United Nations:

>In the _taungya_, the emphasis has always been placed on the success of
the forest planting, more particularly on establishing a forest crop at the
least possible cost. ... The system is frankly exploitative in concept and
operation and cashes upon the needs of the landless and poor people to
serve its own ends. The much vaunted incentives are only a cloak for
uninhibited exploitation, as the savings affected by the Forest Department
are many times more than the expenditure incurred on elementary
conveniences provided to the working force (Seth 1981:34--35).

This ecological exploitation in _taungya_ became severe after
Independence due to an inept and corrupt bureaucratic atmosphere.
The villagers were even deprived of their bona fide entitlements
which they earlier enjoyed under the colonial regime. The
first onslaught came in the form of denial of nominal wages for
extra work beyond 90 days. Earlier the forest villagers were paid
Rs 1.50 per day for additional work between 90 and 275 days. After
Independence, they were forced to finish all the works within 90
days by the lower forest officials. Simultaneously, there was continuous
threat of eviction if anyone failed to finish his assigned
work within 90 days even due to illness. This denial of entitlement
became regularised along with ill-treatment and torture by
the forests officials and staff like the beat officer, range officer
and forest guards. They often asked for free paddy, milk, ghee
and fish from the people and forced people to do free labour in
the homes of the officials. Moreover, they misbehaved with and
insulted the forest villagers. The problem intensified further with
the increase in population. Despite this there was no initiative by
the department to accommodate those second generation settlers
under the _taungya_ who stayed in the forest villages without any
agreement with the department. These second generation settlers
were deprived of landholdings and other entitlements like
free firewood, grazing, intercropping, etc. Many villagers stayed
in the premises of their relatives who were agreement holders
and shared the land for cultivation allotted to them. It led to fragmentation
of the agricultural lands albeit unofficially and this affected
the basic subsistence economy of the villagers as a whole.
All these factors contributed to increasing grievances among the
forest villagers as their livelihood conditions worsened day by day
and so did the oppression and exploitation under the _taungya_ system.
However, their aspirations and growing discontent were not
crystallised into a struggle until the peasant and workers struggle
took a decisive turn during the 1950s and 1960s in the region.

# Radical Politics

As integral parts of the social life, environmental issues are
shaped in the context of larger socio-economic processes. Due to
constant dialogue among different spheres of life, environmental
movements often coincide with other forms of struggle and vice
versa. In the context of the Dooars, though the radicalism of this
forest movement was greatly inspired by the ideals and techniques
of Subhash Chandra Bose it also got an impetus from the
left-radical traditions of workers' and peasants' struggles in Bengal
which started on the eve of Independence in the region. There is
no denying that movements like the _Tebhaga movement_, _Berubari
movement_, _Food movement_ and the _Naxal Bari movement_ in
the Dooars and the adjoining districts of North Bengal prepared
the radical atmosphere as a whole but the single and most important
contribution behind the radicalism of the historic forest
movement against _taungya_ perhaps was credited to the tea
workers' movement in Dooars which had its direct bearing upon
the awakening of mass consciousness in the forest villages. In the
1950s and 1960s leftist trade unions in tea gardens organised
movements on many different issues, including low wages, heavy
workload, low qualities of ration and irregularity in the bonus,
provident fund, etc.[^/4] The struggle and success of the tea workers,
particularly in the _1955 Bonus Movement_ left a considerable impact
on the psyche of the forest villagers and helped to initiate
the struggle. The obvious reason was the multiplicity of interaction
between tea gardens and forests on several counts, almost
similar characteristics of the ecosystem (as most of the tea gardens
found their place in the forest fringe area) and some common
climatic and geospatial hazards like flood, cyclone, elephant
attacks, etc. All these factors contributed to the favourable conditions
for continuous interaction between forest villagers and tea
garden workers that led to the sharing of their problems and
experiences of life. This sharing even turned into learning from
each other for mutual benefit.

Despite great inspiration from the tea workers' struggle, the
final ground for the movement was prepared with the formation
of the first United Front (UF) government in 1967 in West Bengal.
The UF government in its 18-point programme recognised the
legitimate rights to form unions by the employees of all categories,
including workers and peasants. The pro-labour policy of the
government was anticipated with the legitimising of the _gherao_
(surrounding an official in protest) by the then Labour Minister
Subodh Banerjee (Ghosh 1981:63--68). This unique technique
of protest was adopted extensively throughout the struggle
against _taungya_.

# Shaping the Resistance (1967--68)

Ramesh Roy, a ration dealer at Hasimara took the initiative to
organise the forest villagers with the help of the Forward Bloc
(FB) district leadership at Jalpaiguri. Prominent among them
were Binoy Bhowmick, Nirmal Bose, Satyajoyti Sen, Mukulesh
Sanyal and Sudhanshu Kumar Majumder, who were the products
of middle class radicalism in Bengal and had imbibed the ideals
of Subhash Chandra Bose during the freedom struggle. In October
1967 Ramesh Roy and his followers started their first campaign
at Kodal Basty followed by Godamdabri, Menda Bari, Holapara
and other forest villages under the Cooch Behar forest division.
Though the resistance started at Kodal Basty it registered its
first success at Godamdabri where the villagers successfully resisted
the eviction initiative of 29 forest villagers, who were the
second generation settlers and had no agreement with the department.
Following the massive agitation against the beat and
range officer at Godamdabri along with frequent _gheraos_, Roy
was arrested and spent 15 days in jail. Despite the fall of the UF
government in November, the success of Godamdabri quickly
spread to other parts of the Dooars and by the beginning of 1968
the villagers from different divisions started to contact Roy. He
had already organised a group of volunteers to carry forward the
struggle. The most well known of them were Emanuel Kujur,
Nikuddin Kujur, Jogen Narjinary, Sarba Singh Lama, Khudiram
Pahan and Harman Singh. The governor Dharma Vira came to
Hasimara around the same time and nearly 1,000 forest villagers
under the leadership of Roy organised a protest rally and met the
governor in a deputation. In that deputation forest villagers for
the first time raised their voice against _taungya_ and demanded
that it be abolished immediately. Taking the momentum of the
movement into account and the fact that the forest villagers were
peasants and workers both, the organisation for the movement
was formed in the first half of 1968 namely the North Bengal Forest
Workers and Jaigir Cultivators Union (NBFWJCU). The NBFWJCU
built up their stronghold quickly throughout the Dooars with the
formation of village level committees which carried out _gheraos_
and other agitational programmes. The movement was successful
in resisting the departmental eviction measures at Godamdabri.
This resulted in annihilating the villagers' fear of the forest
guards and other officials and they started talking against the
department openly while registering their protest against all
sorts of injustice. As a consequence the department failed to
renew the annual agreement which was considered to be the
backbone of _taungya_. Though the movement lost its momentum
a little in the wake of the state's assembly elections, and particularly
after the devastating flood of October 1968, which paralysed
both the activities of administration and the unions, it
regained vigour when the UF came to power on 25 February 1969.

# Protect Forest People (1969--71)

The FB was a crucial part of the second UF and led the voices of
the movement to the orbit of power. As a result, in its 32 point
programme, the UF included the issue of protecting forests and
forest dwellers as an important political objective of the government
for the first time in the history of West Bengal and perhaps in
the history of India too. Point no 3(C) stated that "The UF Government
will pay due attention to preservation of forests. It will look
to the legitimate interests of the people who live in forest areas
and depend on forests for their livelihood."[^/5] This positive approach
encouraged the forest villagers to carry on their struggle. The
movement immediately spread to different villages under Jalpaiguri,
Cooch Behar and Buxa divisions with the emergence of a
new group of leaders like Jogen Rava, Lagrus Orao, Avilak
Thakur, Prem Chand Lakra, Sanchu Munda, etc. Several new village
committees were formed while creating women and youth brigades
where the former acted as a shield against police atrocities
in each demonstration and the latter were responsible for mobilising
people around a particular agitational programme and
maintaining a network of information. The routine departmental
work was virtually paralysed. The lower grade officials and forest
guards who earlier enjoyed tremendous authority became powerless.
In some cases, the movement took a violent turn. However,
in the middle of 1969, the NBFWJCU prepared the historic 17
point charter of demands and placed it before the minister of forests
in Calcutta. The charter included almost all aspects like the
abolishment of _taungya_, introduction of wages of Rs 3 per day
per head, permanent settlement of forest villagers with 15 _bighas_
of arable land per family, introduction of _panchayat_ in the forest
villages among others. The then forest minister Bhobotosh Soren
convened a tripartite meeting at Writers Building in the presence
of delegates of the NBFWJCU and the principal chief conservator
of forests on 15 October 1969. A resolution was passed for the
introduction of wages of Rs 2.50 per day, allotment of a fund in
the next budget for improving the livelihood conditions of the villagers,
etc. Besides, several issues like land, _panchayat_ and irrigation
were put under active consideration of the administration.
Though the resolution was a remarkable success as it put the
stamp on the discontinuation of _taungya_ with the recommendation
for introducing wages it put the issue of land under the purview
of the Divisional Forest Officer (DFO), and did not discuss the
matter of unemployed forest villagers.

The situation became grave when even after a month following
the resolution no government order was issued by the department
to introduce wages in forestry operations. Consequently,
the beat officers/rangers and even DFO's refused to pay wages
despite being shown a copy of the resolution. The executive committee
of the NBFWJCU convened an urgent meeting and called
for an indefinite strike in all the divisions of Dooars in the winter
of 1969. Despite initial opposition from the department and several
confrontations with the departmental contractors the historic
strike continued for more than 18 months until the _taungya_
system was brought to an end.

Amidst the strike in 1970 the movement took a new turn. It
started exerting pressure on the DFOs to settle the issue of land.
In Jalpaiguri and Buxa divisions, the DFOs placed the proposal
before the union of providing 2.5 acre of land, i.e, 7.5 _bigha_ in accordance
with their working plan.[^/6] It was a demoralising proposal
because it was half of the demand for 15 _bigha_ and even less
than the earlier regime of forest management. In this context, the
union placed an alternative demand for three _bigha_ for the non-agreement
holders and the existing amount of land for the forest
villagers. However, this was refused by the department. There
was no option before the union but to forcibly occupy forest-lands.
The land reform programmes of the second UF government acted
as a catalyst in the process. Hence under the leadership of the
movement villagers started occupying vacant land in almost all
the divisions and new settlements were established like Bala
Para, Naya Basty, and Dima Basty along with the occupation of
forestland adjacent to existing villages. Finally the deputy secretary,
Government of West Bengal issued an order introducing
wages according to the resolution and providing 2.5 acre to each
"genuine forest villager". Importantly it asked the department to
regularise encroachment of land by the forest villagers on or before
28 July 1970 and to take stern action against any encroachment
of land after the due date even if it meant taking help from the
police.[^/7] However, the department officials at the division level who
were annoyed with the villagers used the order as an instrument
to punish them. Accompanied by the police force they claimed
that the occupation of land had taken place after 28 July but
there was stiff opposition by the villagers. These officials also began
employing outside labour under forest contractors in forestry
plantations, which was earlier the sole area of activity of the forest
villagers. In 1971, this led to several clashes both between the
outside labourers and forest villagers and between the department
contractor and the forest villagers. The clash took a violent
turn at Gossaihat under Jalpaiguri division. When in the last
week of May 1971 the department sponsored contractor from
Gairkata started plantation with the help of outside labour near
Gossaihat thousands of forest villagers from there, Mela and
Khuklung forest villages marched to the plantation site under the
leadership of Prem Chand Lakra and Sanchu Munda. They
assaulted the contractor and women volunteers put a chain of
shoes around his neck. He was forced to sit on a donkey and
taken in procession to Khuntimari Beat nearly five km away from
the place. They shouted slogans against the department and
ransacked the beat office and asked the outside labour to leave
the worksite. The department lodged a First Information Report
(FIR) against the two prominent leaders of the movement along
with some other villagers. On 10 June 1971 the police from
Dhupguri police station went to Gossaihat to arrest these leaders.

The news of Lakra and Munda's arrest spread rapidly and
ignoring the stormy weather villagers assembled to force their
leaders' release. To disperse the mob the police started firing in
which five villagers were killed.[^/8] The police arrested a number of
villagers and took them to the Dhupguri police station and produced
before the Jalpaiguri court on 11 June 1971. The arrested
persons got bail within a month and a few years later the union
won the case which freed them from all charges. However, the
martyrdom of the five villagers, namely, Ajman Rava, Jetha Rai,
Mongra Orao, Sadhu Orao and Chhandu Orao had a tremendous
impact on the overall political atmosphere. Within a couple of
days, a deputation was sent to the Jalpaiguri district magistrate
and several processions were held at Jalpaiguri and Alipurduar.
The state leadership of the FB demanded immediate introduction
of wages and abolition of departmental oppression and exploitation,
compensation for the family of the martyrs and punitive action
against the police and forest department. Deputy Chief Minister
Bijoy Singh Nahar convened a meeting with the union leaders at
Writers Building for quashing of terms and conditions under the
heinous agreement of _taungya_ and consequently Rs 3 per day
was introduced along with the consideration of other demands
like six-hour work. Moreover, the government agreed that the
villagers would not be evicted from the land they occupied. In
this way, the movement finally brought the _taungya_ system to an
end and a new era of forest governance began in North Bengal.
Indeed it was the dawn of people's power in the forest domain
and which led the movement into another phase of struggle.

# Drive Out Corruption, Save Forest (1972--76)

The later phase of the movement led by the NBFWJCU started in
1972 with the oath taking in front of the Martyr's Monument at
Gossaihat. The oath was to wage a struggle against the practice
of cutting down unauthorised and young trees by dishonest forest
officials and corrupt contractors in the wake of commercial forestry.
The movement raised the slogan --- _Chor Hatao, Jangal
Bachao_ (Drive out the thief and save the forests). Several corrupt
forest officials were caught red-handed and illicitly cut logs were
recovered by the villagers under the leadership of the union. Village
patrolling and motivation camps were started as a part of
the struggle in different divisions. As a reaction the department
started forceful eviction of the forest villagers, with the help of
the Central Reserve Police Force during the Emergency in 1975.
The union moved the Kolkata High Court in 1976 against the
eviction. Finally, with the injunction from the High Court (HC) the
department stopped the process and the final verdict of the HC in
1979 stopped the recurrent eviction drives of the department in
the North Bengal forest villages. Nevertheless, the movement
was not successful in stopping corruption. The forest villagers accused
Parimal Mitra the first forest minister in the Left Front in
1977 of opening the flood gates of corruption in Dooars and who
was allegedly involved in illegal trade and encouraged both the
contractors and forest officials to cut down trees. Despite this, the
movement continued to inspire the forest dwellers in North Bengal.
_The Orange Orchard resistance_ in Buxa hills during 1993--94, the
introduction of the _panchayat movement_ during 1998 and other
movements throughout the 1990s got an impetus from this historic
movement. The legacy of the movement continues in the
ongoing forest rights' movement which has started since 2001[^/9]
under the leadership of the National Forum of Forest People and
Forest Workers (NFFPFW). The senior most regional convener Lal
Singh Bhujel happens to be the proud disciple of Ramesh Roy.
More importantly what the other resistances including the
present one owes to that pioneering struggle is the method of
empowering forest people through movements, which are diametrically
opposite to the many projected paradigms of participation
under the imposed mechanism of forest management in
the name of forest protection or afforestation programmes
throughout the country.

# Impact of Subhash Chandra Bose

No account of the movement would be complete without remembering
the effect of Bose's philosophy of action on the struggle
against ecological exploitation. Nirmal Bose who introduced
Ramesh Roy to Bose's ideals was a by-product of the middle class
radicalism in Bengal during the freedom movement when Jalpaiguri
was one of the most important centres of struggle in
North Bengal. In 1939 Bose's visit to Jalpaiguri as the president of
the All India Congress Committee to attend Bengal Provincial
Congress inspired a large section of the youth to carry forward
his ideals most of whom joined the FB when it was formed at
Jalpaiguri in 1942. Nirmal Bose played a pioneering role along
with others in the freedom struggle led by the FB in the district
which continued even in the post-independence period. He
along with the district leadership of the FB extended their full
support to the forest villagers' movement. In Netaji's plan of action
the "Indian Struggle" of the party would stand for the interests
of the masses like peasants, workers, etc, against the vested
interests and for the complete political and economic liberation
of the Indian people (Bose 1981:349). One of the major demands
of the movement in its 17-point charter was to establish _panchayats_
in the forest villages, which would have been inspired by
Bose's programmes for "social reconstruction" to "build up a new
social structure assuming the village communities of the past,
that were ruled by the village '_Panch_' and will strive to break
down the existing social barriers like caste" (_ibid_: 349--50). Besides
the ideals, the movement was greatly indebted to Bose's
technique of "active resistance" what he viewed as the only
method to overthrow the unjust system. Bose was a critic of the
Gandhian technique of passive resistance which could reform but
would fail to contribute to the revolutionary transformation. Following
the method of "active resistance" the movement took on a
militant character in the form of _gheraos_, strikes etc. in order to
bring down the exploitative regime of forest governance. Further,
one of the most important reasons behind the spread of the
movement was its identification with Bose. During my fieldwork,
the forest villagers often told me "earlier we were the member of
Revolutionary Socialist Party but after that when the party of
Subhash Chandra Bose came with its _anti-taungya_ standpoint;
we joined it to end the oppression and exploitation of the department."
Villagers often called Ramesh Roy, seen as the bearer of
Subhash Chandra Bose's ideals as "Roy Babu" and were inspired
by his charismatic leadership and selfless pursuit of politics. This
was an example of what Subhash Bose described as "to merge
one's individual consciousness in mass consciousness" (Bose and
Bose 2004:19). Roy was familiar as the "barefoot leader" of the
movement as he walked barefoot mile after mile through the
rough forest patches to organise masses in the extreme climatic
conditions. Roy believed in the simplicity of life and was living in
an ordinary hut at Rajabhatkahwa with his wife and children
where he had shifted from Hasimara for the cause of the movement.
Though after 1977 with the coming of the Left Front into
power a number of left leaders managed to live better. Roy retained
his frugal lifestyle until his death in 2008. The movement
which sacrificed the lives of five forest villagers in the struggle
against _taungya_ upheld Bose's message in the "Political Testament".
He said:

>Forget not that the greatest curse for a man is to remain a slave. Forget
not that the grossest crime is to compromise with injustice and wrong.
Remember the eternal law: You must give life, if you want to get it.
And remember that the highest virtue is to battle against inequity, no
matter what the cost may be (_ibid_: 197).

# The Alternative Paradigm

The historic forest movement in Dooars which took place before
the _Chipko movement_ represents the alternative paradigm within
Indian environmentalism both in its content and form. The
movement broadly falls within the left-radical tradition of struggle
since it conforms to the general standpoint of the left regarding
"a positive and proactive role of the state in the sustainable
harnessing of local resources" (Prasad 2004:14) and greater
access and control of the ecosystem people over the natural
resource base (Gadgil and Guha 2000:120). However, it differs
considerably from the conventional Marxist position in its
approach and looks for inspiration to the nationalist ideals of
Netaji. As a movement of the ecosystem people it adheres to the
national interest while fighting against the exploitation of both
nature and people. This can be seen in the union's statement before
the Kolkata HC which "endorsed the policy of effective implementation
of policy of afforestation in North Bengal to save
forests in national interest and also in the interest of saving national
animals".[^/10] The movement was not organised to fight
against any specific class enemy but the focus was essentially
against the system of praxis and remained consistent in the
struggle against _taungya_ as well as corruption. Against _taungya_
the main demands were abolishing of the slavery with its "outdated
terms and conditions" and against corruption the demand
was to get rid of the practice of handing over the responsibility of
logging to outside contractors who are unconcerned about the
degradation of forests. The movement explicitly or implicitly
rested upon the holistic view of organic interdependence between
the ecosystem and the people where protection of forests
implied protection of those very people from all sorts of suffering
and vice versa. This holistic underpinning led to emphasis
on fair and just governance of forest and its people with due recognition
of the people's organisation in the overall process.

The movement posed a challenge to the one-sided understanding
of the nature of grass-roots environmentalism in India
as it was represented by the "environmentalism of the poor". It
showed that environmentalism in India did not always arise out
of conflict over natural resources but often emanated from the
ecological exploitation through co-option under an apparent
cooperative gesture of the state agencies in the management of
ecosystem. The idea of "ecological distribution conflicts" could
not capture the inclusive technique of domination over the
ecosystem people and usurpation of their contribution to the
ecosystem to further the top-down agenda of resource management.
The "environmentalism of the poor" therefore, rested on
the inadequate criteria of characterisation of the struggle of the
eco-system people against the oppressive system of resource
management. Secondly, along with the struggle of the ecosystem
people against all forms of displacement and unequal access to
resources the movement is equally critical about the pseudo recognition
of their role merely at the local level of implementation
in lieu of providing certain incentives while not acknowledging
their authority in the arena of policymaking. Thirdly, like the
"environmentalism of the poor" the movement was not limited
only to the demand for fair distribution of ecological goods and
recognition of rights of the ecosystem people but also demanded
a fair system of harnessing natural resources free from corruption
and a fair opportunity of employment of those people in the
process of regeneration, felling and maintenance of forests.
Finally, the movement raised the fundamental question of ascribing
a misleading phrase to the struggle of the ecosystem people
in India as "environmentalism of the poor" which restricted the
understanding of their struggle merely around the issues of livelihood
and subsistence while undermining the issues of their
dignity against humiliation and their desire for a better life
against exploitation, which might work as a motive force behind the
struggle. Further, the issues which the movement upholds are still
relevant in the context of natural resource governance not only at
the regional level but national and global level. Notwithstanding
certain progressive legislations like the National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act, the Forest Rights Act, 2006 at the national
level, the problems of unemployment and land rights are yet to
be resolved, particularly when the conservation regime has
choked the regular employment opportunities of these people
and globalisation has taken away their mineral rich forest-lands.
Villagers have accused the contract system of jeopardising forest
preservation through irregular cleaning, thinning, weeding, etc.
It often deprives them of their legitimate wages guaranteed under
the Minimum Wage Act. The movement reveals further the
politics of co-option through the inclusive technique of incorporating
people's knowledge and workforce, which continue to exploit
the ecosystem people under the disguise of collaborative or
participatory resource management at the global level. This exploitation
hinders the organic exchange between life forms and
results in defacement of that relation. The lesson that the movement
has left behind is to build up resistance against the exploitation,
to find more democratic space for negotiation, alteration
and challenging of the entire process of ecosystem governance
for the sake of both the forest and its people while innovating
new ways to keep the process of organic exchange alive and free.

# References

::: {#refs}

\ 

Bose, Sisir, ed. (1981): _Netaji Collected Works, Vol-2,
Indian Struggle, 1920--1942_ (Kolkata: Netaji
Research Bureau).

\ 

Bose, Sisir and Sugata Bose, ed. (2004): _Subhas
Chandra Bose: The Alternative Leadership, Speeches,
Articles, Statements and Letters June 1939--1941_,
(Kolkata and Delhi: Co published by Netaji
Research Bureau and Permanent Black).

\ 

Das Gupta, Ranajit (1985): "Peasants, Workers and
Freedom Struggle, Jalpaiguri, 1945--47", _Economic
& Political Weekly_, Vol XX, No 30.

\ 

Gadgil, Madhav and Ramachandra Guha (2000):
"Ecology and Equity" in Gadgil and Guha's _The
Use and Abuse of Nature_ (New Delhi: OUP).

\ 

Ghosh, Anjali (1981): _Peaceful Transition to Power:
A Study of Marxist Political Strategies in West
Bengal 1967--1977_ (Kolkata: Firma KLM Private
Limited).

\ 

Guha, Ramachandra (1989): _The Unquiet Woods: Ecological
Change and Peasant Resistance in the
Himalayas_ (Delhi: OUP).

\ 

Guha, Ramachandra and J Martinez-Alier (2000):
 _Varieties of Environmentalism: Essays North and
South_ (New Delhi: OUP).

\ 

Jha, Sourish (2010): "Struggle for Democratising
Forests: The Ongoing Forest Rights Movement in
India", _Social Movement Studies_, Vol 9, No 4.

\ 

Karlsson, B G (1997): _Contested Belonging: An Indigenous
People's Struggle for Forest and Identity in
Sub-Himalayan Bengal_ (Lund: Lund University).

\ 

Nair, P K Ramachandran (1993): _An Introduction to
Agroforestry_ (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers).

\ 

Prasad, Archana (2004): _Environmentalism and the
Left: Contemporary Debates and Future Agendas in
Tribal Areas_ (New Delhi: LeftWord).

\ 

Seth, S K (1981): _Forestry for Local Community Development
Programme_, India and Sri Lanka (Rome:
FAO).

\ 

Sharit, Bhowmik (1981): _Class Formation in the Plantation
System_ (New Delhi: People's Publishing
House).

\ 

Sivaramakrishnan, K (2000): "State Sciences and
Development Histories: Encoding Local Forestry
Knowledge in Bengal" in _Development and
Change_, Vol 31, pp. 61--89.

:::

[^/1]: British annexed "Bengal Dooars" in 1864--65 from
Bhutanese rule and the boundary separating
Bhutan hills from the Dooars were finally demarcated
with the creation of a new district, namely,
Jalpaig uri in 1869. For details see Karlsson (1997),
pp. 92--93.

[^/2]: See Writ Petition in the High Court of Calcutta.
CR No 5165(W) of 1976, CR 8893 (W) of 1976 and
CR 800 (W) of 1976, p. 5.

[^/3]: For further details see agreement between forest
villagers of Bhutri forest village and the Government
of West Bengal as on 1 January 1966, DFO
Jalpaiguri division.

[^/4]: For a detail account of tea workers movement see
Sharit (1981).

[^/5]: See 32-Point Programme of the UF Government
in 1969, in Ghosh 1981: C-29, Appendix Four.

[^/6]: Under this new policy in the plains' area of wet
cultivation allotted to each household shall not
exceed 2 acres, or the total area of land allotted for
homestead and cultivation may not exceed 2.5 acres.
See _Fifth Working Plan of Kurseong Forest Division
(1969--70 to 1988--89)_, Vol-I, 1976, p. 273 and
the _Seventh Working Plan of the Jalpaiguri Forest
Division (1970--71 to 1989--90)_, Vol-I, 1976, p. 172.

[^/7]: See "Annexure E", Writ Petition in the High Court
of Calcutta CR No 5165(W) of 1976, CR 8893 (W)
of 1976 and CR 800 (W) of 1976, p. 30.

[^/8]: Karlsson (1997) viewed the movement as a
Forward Bloc Movement in his sketchy account of
about merely three pages, which are based upon
his interview with a single volunteer of the
movement, namely, Abhilak Thakur. The account
is utterly incomplete in its representation and
contains serious flaws about incidents of Gossaihat
and Bala. In this respect in my interview with
Abhilak Thakur he admitted that his speech was
misrepresented by Karlsson probably due to the
language problem. Moreover, Karlsson failed to
grasp the significance and context of the movement
to a great extent.

[^/9]: To get a fair picture about the ongoing forest
movement in North Bengal see Jha Sourish (2010).

[^/10]: See Writ Petition in the High Court of Calcutta.
CR No 5165 (W) of 1976, CR 8893 (W) of 1976 and
CR 800 (W) of 1976, p. 10.
