_This paper documents the experience of the Saongaon workers co-operative in West Bengal and the Tachai
workers co-operative in Tripura, both in the tea industry. The author stresses the broad democratic method of
functioning which has encouraged workers' participation in the decision-making process. The changes in organisational
structures and the evolution of formal and informal methods to prevent the concentration of power in
a new bureaucracy are highlighted._

\ 

The co-operative movement has been
recognised as one of the forces for improving
the economic and social conditions of the
backward sections of society. Co-operatives
are institutions which are expected to promote
self-management among the different
sections of the people. However, there has
been considerable discussion on whether cooperatives
have their own ideologies or
whether they are influenced by other
ideologies. This paper attempts to examine
the role of ideology in shaping co-operatives.
We have taken cases of co-operatives in tea
plantations to show how ideology plays an
important role in the successful functioning
of co-operatives. In a general sense ideology
can be defined as the consciousness of a
social group which determines its goals,
means and forms of practical and political
activities. Ideology also supplies the justification
for various social, political, moral
and aesthetic ideals of a group or of
individuals.

Co-operation as a form of human organisation
has been in existence since the beginning
of civilisation. In a broad sense, the different
types of exchange and reciprocal relations
which existed in pre-industrial societies
and which were crucial for survival of its
members could be regarded as co-operative
action. These types of co-operation are
however different from what we now understand
as the co-operative movement. The
origins of co-operation as a formal movement
can be traced to the first half of the
nineteenth century in the philosophy of
Robert Owen. The first co-operative was
started by a handful of weavers in England
in 1844 and was known as the Equitable
Pioneers of Rochdale. The basic principles
governing the functioning of this cooperative
were later adopted by the cooperative
movement all over the world,
These were, one vote for each member, sale
at market prices and division of profits
among shareholders on the basis of the
extent of patronage.[^/1]

Co-operatives in the present do not function
merely as mutual benefit societies. They
have in addition certain social obligations
which are spelt out in the principles of cooperation.
The commission on co-operative
principles, appointed by the International
Co-operative Alliance in 1964, noted in its
report that "co-operation at its best aims at
something beyond promotion of interests of
the individual members ... Its object is rather
to promote the progress and welfare of the
humanity. It is this aim that makes a cooperative
society something different from
an ordinary economic enterprise and
justifies its being tested, not simply from the
standpoint of its business efficiency, but also
from the standpoint of its contribution to
the moral and social values which elevate
human life above the merely material and
animal"[^/2] This implies that there is a
qualitative difference between the earlier
forms of co-operation and the present cooperative
societies. The earlier exchange relations
were a result of the existing socioeconomic
formations. These relations were
not aimed at altering the economic relations
in the society they operated in. On the contrary,
they played a functional role and contributed
towards perpetuating the system.

The co-operative movement on the other
hand grew out of a need to change the
existing society. The early co-operators
such as the Rochdale Pioneers and Robert
Owen in England, Herr Schulze and
FW Raiffeinsen in Germany propagated the
co-operative movement as an alternative to
the exploitative nature of capitalist society
in nineteenth century Europe. Co-operation
for them was a vehicle through which
capitalist exploitation could be replaced by
an egalitarian and just society. They envisioned
co-operatives not as bodies which
were functional to their respective societies
but as instruments for transforming their
societies. In this way, the objectives of cooperatives
differ not only from those of
private enterprise but also from traditional
forms of exchange and reciprocal relations.

# PRINCIPLES OF CO-OPERATION

Keeping these objectives in mind, the
International Co-operative Alliance has
recognised six basic principles of cooperation.
These are, voluntary membership,
democratic administration, limited interest
on share capital, equitable division of
surplus, education and, mutual co-operation
among co-operatives.[^/3] Some of these principles
deal with the business activities of
co-operatives and are not very important for
our present discussion. We shall restrict
ourselves to those principles concerning
participation and social change.

The principle of voluntary membership
stipulates that any person who fulfills the
basic requirements of the co-operative and
who is willing to abide by its objectives
should be allowed membership. The principle
of democratic administration tries to ensure
that all members have an effective say
in the functioning of the co-operative. This
is the most significant principle of cooperatives
because it distinguishes them
from other enterprises. The objectives of the
co-operative movement do not limit
themselves only to securing economic
benefits for its members. The movement is
also expected to inculcate a sense of participation
by building democratic institutions
of equal partners. It can be distinguished
from joint stock companies by its principle
of one vote for each member and not
each share. Therefore, even if a member has
more than one share he has only one vote.
The attempt here is to ensure that control
of the organisation does not lie in the hands
of a few people who manage to corner a
large number of shares. Thus, in principle the
status of all members are equal and all have
equal opportunities for participating in the
decision-making process. The Commission
on Co-operative Principles observed that
democratisation is important because a cooperative
"exists in order to place the common
people in effective control of the
mechanism of modern economic life (and)
it must give the individual (only too often
reduced to the role of a cog in that machine)
a chance to express himself, a voice in the
affairs and destinies of his co-operative and
scope to exercise his own judgment".[^/4]

Democratic control of a co-operative is
not restricted to exercising one's franchise
during elections. It is a continuous process
which is expected to encourage all members
of the co-operative to actively participate in
its functioning. The social implications of
these could be far-reaching. For developing
countries like India, co-operatives can provide
scope for increasing awareness of the
backward sections of society, such as
peasants, agricultural workers and industrial
workers. These sections have for long been
isolated from the decision-making process
because of the belief that they are incapable
of deciding what is good for themselves. Cooperatives,
therefore, have the potential of
institutionalising the democratic process
whereby it becomes a continuous involvement
of people in its management. They
may be able to increase the self-confidence
of their members by making them realise
that they are capable of dealing with complex
problems of management.

We have tried to analyse so far some of
the principles of the co-operative movement
which can help in promoting self-management
among its members. One has
to constantly scrutinise the functioning of
co-operatives to understand whether these
principles have any influence on their
members and if not, how can they be made
more relevant. For example, one can draw
a line between ownership and control.
Though a co-operative is formed on the
principles of equality and joint ownership
it can be often found that a small minority
may have effective control of the organisation.
In such cases, even if this minority is
benevolent enough to look after the interests
of all members, the majority is excluded
from the decision-making process and thus
the basic purpose of these co-operatives are
defeated. One of the ways of overcoming this
problem is to educate the members on the
objectives of co-operation. Co-operative
education could help members in understanding
their rights and obligations and will increase
their awareness. Education also helps
in making members understand that cooperatives
are different from other types of
enterprises.

At the same time we must realise that the
principles of co-operation have their own
limitations. They do not help us in differentiating
between the various types of cooperatives.
All co-operatives are not the
same as we can distinguish between the functioning
of different co-operatives and differentiate
them accordingly. There are several
factors such as, leadership, political support,
marketing, etc., which distinguish one cooperative
from another. However, the most
significant we feel is the ideological
framework in which a co-operative operates.
We shall try to show that this framework is
necessary for attaining the basic objectives
of a co-operative and even for its normal
functioning. This aspect needs further
elaboration because it is often implied that
the co-operative movement has a common
ideology which sets it apart from other social
and political movements.

# ROLE OF IDEOLOGY

The growth of co-operatives and their
diversification into different fields of
economic activity encouraged some cooperators
to visualise societies where all activities
would be governed through cooperatives.
Such societies would function as
Co-operative Republics and would be formed
through different stages of co-operative
development starting with consumer cooperatives
and later wholesale co-operatives
and finally producer co-operatives.[^/5] This
idea of republics, which indicated sovereign
states, was later modified to that of a Cooperative
Commonwealth[^/6] wherein cooperatives
all over the world would strive to
build a parallel socio-economic order
through mutual help and co-operation.
Others emphasised the emergence of a cooperative
sector "complementary to, but exercising
influence upon public and private
sectors".[^/7]

There are two basic presumptions in these
views. Firstly, the co-operative movement has
a single and distinct ideology and secondly,
the movement is an end in itself and not a
means for achieving some ends. This was
quite different from the approaches of the
earlier co-operators such as Owen and
others. These people were idealists, and they
viewed co-operatives as one of the means for
achieving an egalitarian society and not an
end in itself. The third view is that of the
marxists who would be inclined to agree with
the earlier co-operators insofar as the movement
is not an end but would disagree with
their methods of achieving these ends.

Ideological divisions become more pronounced
while analysing the social role of
producer co-operatives. Unlike consumer cooperatives
which attempt to provide relief to
consumers by making essential commodities
available at fair prices, producer cooperatives
by and large attempt to alter the
existing nature of production relations. In
this sense they are more radical. How they
will perform this task and what type of
society will be established are determined
largely by ideology.

Idealist thinkers like Robert Owen believed
that it was possible to build a new society
with the help of working people's associations,
communes and co-operatives. There
would be no exploitation or oppression in
such a society and the transition would come
through peaceful means and without class
conflict.[^/8] Karl Marx too wrote of the cooperative
movement as "one of the transforming
forces of the present society based
upon class antagonism. Its great merit is to
practically show that the present pauperising
and despotic system of the _subordination
of labour_ to capital can be superseded
by the republican and beneficent system _of
the association of free and equal producers_."[^/9]
Marx had made this observation
in his instructions to delegate attending the
First Congress of the International Workingmen's
Association which was held in
Geneva in September 1866. At another place
he stated, "We recommend to the workingmen
to embark on _co-operative production_
rather than in _co-operative stores_. The
latter touch but the surface of the present
economic system, the former attacks its
groundwork"[^/10]

Obviously the objectives Marx had in
mind while enunciating the merits of producer
co-operatives were not the same as
those of Owen. Marxists have been critical
of Owen because of his idealist approach
and his failure to consider class antagonisms.
Lenin's criticism of Owen exemplifies the
difference between the two approaches. He
pointed out that the plans of the old cooperators
were 'fantastic' because "they
dreamed of peacefully remodelling contemporary
society into socialism without taking
into account fundamental questions as
the class struggle, the capture of political
power by the working class, the overthrow
of the rule of the exploiting class. This is why
we are right in regarding as entirely fantastic
this 'co-operative' socialism, and even banal,
the dream of transforming class enemies into
class collaborators and class war into class
peace (so-called class truce) by merely
organising the population into co-operative
societies."[^/11]

The importance of the ideology in cooperation
was elaborated by Lenin when he
distinguished two lines of policy for cooperatives.
These were the proletarian line
and the petty bourgeois line. The former, according
to him, concedes "recognition of the
value of the co-operative societies as a
weapon in (the class) struggle, as one of the
subsidiary means, and a definition of the
conditions under which the co-operative
societies would really play such a part and
not remain simple commercial enterprises"[^/12]
The petty bourgeois line obscures
"the question of the role of the co-operative
societies in the class struggle of the proletariat,
attaching to the co-operative
societies an importance transcending this
struggle ... defining the aims of the cooperative
societies with general phrases that
are applicable to even the bourgeois reformers
..."[^/13]

We can therefore see that the influence of
ideology in determining the objectives of cooperatives
is something which cannot be
glossed over. Right from its formative stages
the co-operative movement has been facing
this problem, as the views of Owen and
Marx indicate. The later co-operators tried
to believe that the ideologies of capitalism
and socialism or communism were not significant
as the movement could sustain itself
on its own ideology. However, the reality
showed that the movement could not remain
neutral, DG Karve who was the chairman
of the Commission on Co-operative Principles
makes this significant point in a lecture.
He noted that reformulation of the
principles of co-operation by the International
Co-operative Alliance became necessary
precisely because of the ideological
issue. He observed that "till the establishment
of a Socialist State in Russia, the cooperators
of the world were not seriously
divided on any ideological ground ... After
the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia, the
Russian co-operators who were already
members of the International Alliance, continued
to be present at the International
Congresses of Co-operators. But, it was not
always a very friendly gathering ... There was
a feeling among international co-operators
that the new pattern of society, the socialist
one, was not quite compatible with the
voluntary and autonomous form of cooperation
..."[^/14] The co-operators of the
'free world' obviously believed that cooperation
was an expression of their type of
society. Naturally for them co-operatives
were expressions of 'free enterprise' and a
socialist state could not hope to have such
co-operatives. According to Karve, the six
principles of co-operation were formulated
mainly to overcome this misconception.
However, even though these have been accepted
by all countries, the difference between
socialist orientation and capitalist
orientation of co-operatives have continued
to grow. This becomes more prominent in
the present context because of the differences
in strategies of development in the
developed capitalist countries and the newly
liberated developing countries. Most of the
latter have become sovereign during the postSecond
World War period and some have
adopted socialistic policies. These may not
be conducive to those of the democracies in
the west. The ideological orientation of cooperatives
in these countries will be different
from those of the developed capitalist countries.
A Soviet social scientist, V Maslennikov
has made the following observation
which could to some extent summarise the
situation. "Under capitalism, co-operation
is entirely dependent on the dominant
capitalist production relations and, at best
helps to ease the material position of individual
groups of working people combined
into co-operatives, whereas in the developing
countries, especially those with a socialist
orientation, co-operatives are used ... for
establishing a new type of production relations
excluding oppression and
exploitation.[^/15]

At the micro level, while examining the
functioning of co-operatives it becomes
quite evident that ideology contributes to the
success or failure of a co-operative to a large
extent. We have taken the case of worker cooperatives
to illustrate the point. In the
following sections we shall examine the functioning
of four such co-operatives in the tea
industry. One of them is the Saongaon
Workers' Co-operative in the Jalpaiguri
district of West Bengal and the other three
are in Tripura. These co-operatives have been
formed in states which have or had (_viz_,
Tripura) coalition governments led by the
Communist Party of India (Marxist) and
they have been promoted by communist
trade unions. The co-operative in West
Bengal was promoted by the All India Trade
Union Congress (_AITUC_) which is ideologically
close to the Communist Party
of India and the ones in Tripura were promoted
by the Centre of Indian Trade
Unions (_CITU_) which is close to the CPI(M).
The major difference is that the West
Bengal government has given no support to
the co-operative there whereas in Tripura, the
co-operatives had the support of the Left
Front government. Besides these four cooperatives,
there are seven more in Tripura
and one in Assam.

# SAONGAON WORKERS' CO-OPERATIVE

The co-operative in West Bengal is known
as the Saongaon Tea and Allied Plantation
Workers' Co-operative Limited and comprises
workers of Sonali Tea Estate. This
plantation is in the Jalpaiguri district which
is situated in the northern part of the state.
It covers an area of approximately 1,200
acres of which a little less than five hundred
acres is under tea. It has four hundred and
ninety-eight workers, half of whom are
women. All workers are tribals (mainly
_Oraons_) from the Chotanagpur region of
Bihar and most of their forefathers were
brought to the tea growing areas as indentured
labour. The two members of the
clerical staff are Bengalis.

In September 1973, the management of
the plantation decided that it was unable to
run it any more due to its accumulated
losses. It therefore abandoned it leaving the
workers to their own fates. On September
23, 1974, the board of directors of the company
passed a resolution handing over the
plantation and its liabilities to its workers.

The workers tried their best to persuade
the management to re-start the plantation,
but to no avail. The condition of the plantation
was deteriorating day by day and
weeds and creepers started growing among
the tea bushes. Since plucking of tea leaves
had stopped, the current crop of leaves was
past its prime and hence useless. The workers
viewed all this with dismay because they
realised that a ruined plantation would
jeopardise their own existence. Finally, in the
beginning of December, when no solution
emerged, they decided that they would run
the plantation on their own. Their trade
union, the _AITUC_-affiliated Cha Bagan
Workers' Union, and especially its general
secretary, Chinmoy Ghosh, took the initiative
in organising them in this new
venture.

A nine-member committee comprising the
general secretary of the union and senior
workers was formed for supervising the
work. The earlier crop had been ruined and
by the time the workers took over, winter had
set in and there was no possibility of a new
crop. Tea plantations in this part of the
country do not bear crops in winter and during
this time the winter cultivation work,
such as, pruning of the bushes, drainage and
irrigation work, is done. The workers
therefore had no income from the plantation
during the first three months, and they
all worked without pay. A few of them had
tiny pieces of agricultural land, and they could
get some food from there. Most workers
subsisted on herbs and roots collected from
the forest nearby. Malnutrition and starvation
was widespread and a few workers died.

However, in spite of these difficulties, a
majority of the workers continued with the
winter cultivation work. Finally, in March,
the following year (1974) the tea bushes bore
their first crop, which would not have been
possible had the plantation not been maintained
during winter. The committee sold
these leaves to the neighbouring tea plantations
and the workers were now able to get
a subsistence wage. Initially, these tea plantations
took advantage of the workers'
helplessness and offered low prices.
However, after a month or so, when the
workers were in a slightly better financial
position, the committee was able to bargain
for better prices. By May 1974, the workers
got their regular wages because of the increased
revenue.

The workers also took an unprecedented
step of granting equal wages to male and
female workers. Traditionally in the tea industry,
wages of females were lower than
those of males though their nature of work
is similar. Sonali Tea Estate became perhaps
the first plantation in the country to remove
wage differences between the sexes. This step
was taken a year and half before the Equal
Remuneration Act, which abolished wage
differences on basis of sex, came into force
(i.e., December 1975).

On September 4, 1974, the workers formed
the co-operative society. The plantation
showed a marked improvement when the cooperative
managed it. Inputs of fertilisers,
pesticides and weedicides were increased and
the workers took greater care in maintaining
the tea bushes. The co-operative also increased
the area under tea by ten acres,
which cost Rs 40,000. These steps helped
in increasing production. The average annual
production of this tea plantation was
8,50,000 kg of green leaves and its highest
recorded yield in the past had been 9,00,000
kg. However, in 1977, it recorded a yield of
10,43,000 kg of green leaves.

The conditions of the workers also improved.
Their income increased by 50 per
cent because the co-operative was more
liberal in granting monetary incentives. The
amounts spent on medical facilities, house
repairing and maintenance, water supply and
sanitation were double that of what was
spent by the previous management. Hence,
under the co-operative, the condition of the
plantation as well as its workers showed
marked improvement.

It should be noted that all the above-mentioned
development activities were carried
out by the co-operative's income from the
sale of green leaves. It received no loan, subsidy
or grant from any source. At the same
time, by 1977, the co-operative was able to
accumulate savings of Rs 7,00,000 in the
Central Co-operative Bank at Jalpaiguri.

Another important feature is that the
plantation was run exclusively by the workers
and without the help of professional
management. The entire management of the
plantation was done by its tribal workers
with guidance from its union. The cooperative
was managed by a board of directors
comprising nine elected members. The
board met atleast twice a month when it
took stock of the work done and planned
the future course of action. In fact, all matters
concerning the immediate problems of
the garden were discussed by the board.

In order to ensure greater participation in
management, atleast seven directors were
changed at each annual general meeting.
This practice encouraged more members to
take part in the decision-making process.
The composition of the different boards of
directors show that over the years there was
greater representation of the ordinary
workers. The committee which existed before
the co-operative was formed had only one
ordinary worker on it. All other members,
apart from the general secretary, were from
the supervisory staff (these people are also
tribals). The co-operative's first board of
directors had two members of the clerical
staff, four from the supervisory staff and
three workers, one of whom was a woman.
The next board had one clerk, one supervisor
and the rest were workers of whom
three were women. This composition remained
in the subsequent boards. A
representative from the clerical staff was
necessary because most of the workers and
supervisors were illiterate, and they needed
someone to note the minutes, deal with correspondence,
etc.

The co-operative, on the suggestion of the
union, decided to discard traditional
methods of maintaining discipline, such as
charge-sheets, show-cause notices, etc. Persuasion,
rather than coercion would be used
in disciplining erring workers. Whenever
cases of indiscipline, such as slackness in
work, negligence, etc., were reported, the
directors would try to persuade the person
involved to rectify his or her ways. Meetings
in the labour lines were held quite frequently
to convince the workers that the situation
had now changed and that, since they were
the owners, any harm done to the plantation
would harm them as well. In cases
where persuasion did not show results, the
matter would be referred to the General
Body of the workers. This body would
review the problem and decide on what sort
of corrective measures should be taken.

In policy decisions too, the General Body
played an important role. Though the board
was the policy-making body, in matters such
as formulation of the budget, plucking
schedules and pruning chart, the opinion of
the workers were sought. These acts increased
the participation of workers in running
the plantation and in spreading the notion
of workers' control among them. Therefore,
though the movement began as the workers'
struggle for existence, it went beyond this
sphere, and it strove to develop as a model for
workers' control.

The success of the co-operative was,
however, short-lived because the former
owners, on seeing the plantation back in
shape, decided to stage a come-back. They
filed a suit in the Calcutta High Court
challenging the validity of the co-operative.
In July 1978, the co-operative had to hand
over possession of the plantation to a court
receiver. In December 1979, the court gave
its verdict upholding the co-operative's
registration and the co-operative regained its
possession. Matters, however, did not end
there as the former owners initiated more
legal battles. The co-operative is at present
involved in litigation over the ownership of
the plantation and its operations have be
stayed, by a court order, since late 1980,
though it still holds possession of the
plantation.

In spite of these legal hurdles, the workers
have remained loyal to the co-operative.
Since it has not been able to function all this
while, the co-operative has no income, and
it has been unable to pay the workers their
wages for the past three years. The workers
are therefore back to where they started, i.e.,
undergoing the same hardships as when the
garden had been abandoned. The main difference
between the present situation and the
earlier one is that the workers now have an
alternative. They can leave the co-operative
and go over to the side of the so-called
owners. The litigation will be withdrawn as
the co-operative will have no basis to fight
and, the former owners will gain control of
the plantation. In this case, though the
workers will lose control over the plantation
they will get back their jobs. However, so far,
the workers have decided to remain loyal to
their co-operative and bear the accompanying
hardships. This act itself shows how deep
the ideas of co-operation and workers' control
have penetrated among them. These
tribal workers would rather starve than give
up their new-found freedom.

One of the biggest disadvantages for the
workers is that the government has remained
totally indifferent to their plight. It could
have helped save this experiment by taking
over the plantation under the provisions of
the Tea (Amendment) Acts of 1976 and 1983
which empower the state government to take
over a sick unit for a period of ten years,
irrespective of legal problems. The plantation
could then be handed over to the cooperative.
Or else, it could have initiated
negotiations with the litigants on behalf of
the workers so as to reach some settlement.
The indifference of the state government is
undoubtedly causing a great deal of harm
to the workers and to this unique
experiment.

# WORKER CO-OPERATIVES IN TRIPURA

The position of worker co-operatives in
Tripura was, fortunately, better than in West
Bengal. All the ten worker co-operatives had
the support of the state government though
of late, the new government has become
hostile. The plantations are spread over the
three districts of the state. These plantations
are small in size and they have around a hundred
workers each.

Tachai Tea Estate in North Tripura district
is the first worker co-operative in the state
which is registered as Tea Garden Workers'
Co-operative Society Limited. It is a new
plantation started in December 1978 by
retrenched workers from neighbouring plantations.
The other nine plantations were sick
and three of them had been closed for more
than a year. The co-operatives at Durgabari
in West Tripura district and Ludua in South
Tripura district were started in 1979, Lilagarh
in 1982 and Darangdilla in 1983, the others
were started in 1986. All these plantations
are managed by their respective workers. The
only non-worker members of each cooperative
are the secretaries of their managing
committees. These people are the local
_CITU_ leaders, and they were the organisers
of the respective co-operatives. We shall
discuss three of these co-operatives, i e,
Tachai, Durgabari and Ludua.

The inspiration for starting Tachai Coopeative
came from Shaktipada Chakravarty,
the general secretary of the _CITU_ affiliated
Tripura Tea Workers' Union
(_TTWU_). He initially organised a group of
85 workers into forming the co-operative,
framed its bye-laws and later persuaded the
government to grant it land. By the end of
1985, the co-operative had brought 100 acres
of land under tea and had a labour force
of 98.

Durgabari and Ludua tea estates had not
been functioning for about two years prior
to the formation of the co-operatives, and
they were in a shambles. Their workers, like
those in Sonali, had to undergo a great deal
of hardship in eking out a living during this
period. The formation of Tachai Cooperative
inspired the trade union organisers
in these two plantations to form worker cooperatives.
They were able to impress upon
the state government that worker cooperatives
would be a more effective and
economical method of restoring sick plantations
than nationalisation. These two cooperatives
were formed in the middle of 1979
and were named Durgabari Tea Estate
Workers' Co-operative Society Limited and
Ludua Cha Bagan Sharamik Samabay
Samity. Durgabari Co-operative had 100
acres under tea of which 35 acres had been
planted after the co-operative was formed.
It had a labour force of 105, Ludua had 160
acres under tea of which 40 acres had been
planted by the co-operative. Its total labour
force was 140. The above figures are for the
year 1985.

A common feature in these three cooperatives
is the economy in the use of
government funds. Government support has
ensured them grants, subsidies and loans. In
most cases one can find that these resources
are used indiscriminately and are even
misappropriated. These co-operatives have
shown a different attitude. Most of the aid
and loans were used for development activities
such as setting up plant nurseries, increasing
the area under tea, planting fast
growing varieties of tea bushes in the vacant
patches, etc. The workers economised on
their own expenses though they were more
generous on development of their plantations.
For example, all worker houses and
the co-operatives' offices had walls of mud
and bamboo with thatched roofs even
though the co-operatives had been given low
interest loans and subsidies for constructing
houses of brick and cement. The amount
saved under this head was diverted to extension
and maintenance of the planted area.
In addition to this, the workers of Durgabari
Co-operative voluntarily accepted reduction
in wages in 1983--84 in order to divert the
amount saved for extension of the area
under tea. The workers in Ludua put in an
extra half-day of work every week without
pay during April to July 1983 so that they
could recover production losses. In Tachai,
the co-operative was able to plant 85 acres
of land with tea bushes during 1979--83 at
a cost which was a little more than half the
estimated cost. The original estimate formulated
by the Tea Board of India in 1979
was Rs 12,00,000 but the co-operative spent
only Rs 7,00,000 in completing the work.

In the field of production too, Durgabari
and Ludua have shown much higher results
as compared to their past. Tachai is a new
plantation, and it has yet to reach its optimum
yield. Durgabari produced only
27,000 kg of green leaves in 1980 but this
increased to 80,000 kg, in 1983 and 1,20,000
kg in 1985. The figures for Ludua for these
years were 55,000 kg, 1,10,000 kg and
1,40,000 kg, respectively. The yield per acre
in these plantations, however, were still lower
than the state's average because the old
planted areas in these plantations were in a
miserable condition and the co-operatives
needed to put in considerable inputs to bring
them back to shape. The bushes had been
damaged and there were large vacant patches
in the planted areas which needed to
be filled with new bushes. The yield per acre
is expected to increase after the development
efforts of the co-operative bear results after
a few years, because it takes atleast five years
for a tea bush to reach its optimum yield.

Though these co-operatives are yet to
break-even financially, they have been successful
in making the workers participate actively
in the activities relating to their
management. This is largely due to the encouragement
and guidance of their respective
organisers. Each organiser took great
pains to ensure that the ideas of joint ownership
and workers' control reached the
general workers. They held frequent
meetings to educate the workers on these
aspects and encouraged them to voice their
opinions on policy issues.

The methods of ensuring participation
differed in each garden as each organiser
kept experimenting with new ideas. In
Tachai, the organiser encouraged the workers
to have informal discussions on the development
of the plantation. For instance, before
deciding on the location of a new plant
nursery, each director had discussions with
groups of workers to know their opinions.
Later, when the board of directors met, they
put forth the views of the workers and held
discussions on them before taking a final
decision. In Durgabari, the organiser held
weekly general body meetings where the problems
of the plantation were discussed,
These meetings were lively and the workers
freely expressed their views.

The organiser for Ludua did not meet the
workers as frequently as the others because
he felt that workers should take decisions on
their own and learn from their mistakes. He
also felt that since the workers have been
associated with the plantation for a long
time, they have greater knowledge about its
problems. Hence, if they are given a free
hand, they could develop their own concept
of management. The workers did make
mistakes and, in the initial stage there was
some indiscipline which had its effect on
production. However, after a year or so the
workers realised their mistakes and decided
on corrective measures. For instance, the
decision to put in extra work during their
holidays was taken on their own, without
consulting their organiser, Hence, the
workers were able to develop a sense of
responsibility from their own experience and
without any prompting from outside.

# CONCLUSION: SIGNIFICANCE OF IDEOLOGY

In order to assess the contribution of a
co-operative to social change we have to consider
its role in reducing social inequalities
and in promoting a spirit of collective
ownership. In the above cases of worker cooperatives
we find that there is a broad
democratic method of functioning which
has encouraged participation of members in
the activities of the co-operatives. These cooperatives
have tried to evolve new methods,
formal and informal, for involving the
general workers in the decision-making process.
The power relations in the co-operatives
were structured in such a manner that all
workers felt that they had equal authority
while deciding on issues relating to management
policy. This encouraged active participation
of the workers and, at the same
time, it prevented the concentration of power
in a centralised bureaucracy. Had such a
bureaucracy developed, it would have
adversely affected participation.

The basis of these co-operatives are not
merely joint ownership but equality of
ownership. Joint ownership can include large
and small owners who have pooled in their
resources to form a co-operative. Most
agricultural co-operatives comprise this type
of heterogeneous ownership. In such cases,
there are greater possibilities of disintegration
because the interests of large owners
may not be the same as those of the small
owners, even though formally there is functional
equality among shareholders. What
may happen in these cases is that those
controlling larger productive resources tend
to dominate by the sheer weight of their
ownership. Worker co-operatives are different
because here the members take over
a unit without having individual ownership
rights, and they manage it collectively. This
provides greater scope for all sections of
worker-members to participate in the cooperative's
activities because their interests
are not differentiated on the basis of ownership
of productive resources.

These objective conditions are not sufficient
to ensure participation. There could be
other types of divisions among the members
which could be a result of the distribution
of power. It is possible that even in a worker
co-operative some workers may become
more influential because of the position they
occupy in the organisational hierarchy or
due to the patronage they receive from the
dominant political forces. This is where we
feel that the role of ideology becomes important
in counteracting these tendencies. It
was not by mere chance that power was not
concentrated in the bands of a few members
in these worker co-operatives. On the contrary,
these co-operatives deliberately encouraged
participation of all workers so as
to diffuse the power structure.

The co-operative at Sonali changed the
organisation of work in order to reduce the
hierarchy. The workers realised that the
traditional organisation was highly stratified
and was suited for an authoritarian structure.
All supervisory posts except the _dafadar_
(gang leader) were abolished. The post of
_dafadar_ was retained because this was
the lowest rank among the supervisors and
these people were the ones who guided the
workers in their work. The other supervisors
were asked to do the work of ordinary
workers, but they were paid their original
wages. Hence, there was the managing
committee which was vested with the
overall supervision of the garden and below
it were the _dafadars_ and the workers.
In the original work organisation there were
five grades between management and
workers. In the tea gardens in Tripura,
organisation of work was not as elaborate
because of the smaller size and fewer
workers. However, the co-operatives then
abolished the posts of supervisors and their
managing committees performed this task.

In addition, the trade unions in all these
co-operatives played an important role in encouraging
the workers in their endeavours.
These trade unions had Marxist orientation,
and they believed that the working class
would ultimately take over the means of production.
They felt that they could practically
demonstrate to the workers the truth of their
beliefs by forming worker co-operatives as
their success would help build up the confidence
of the workers in their ability to
manage production. What was necessary
here was not only a practical demonstration
of their latent abilities but also a reorientation
of their traditional ideas which had confined
them earlier to their passive roles of
following orders. The main task of the
organisers was of attempting to break these
ties of the past. In this sense, the objectives
of these unions have been successful so far
because they have been able to motivate the
workers to challenge the supremacy of the
capitalist class in the management of enterprises.

We can take the case of the co-operative
in Assam to show that despite similar objective
conditions, the management of cooperatives
may not run on the same lines.
The tea garden in Assam, Wo ka Tea Estate,
was acquired by the Assam Tea Employees
Co-operative Organisation Limited
(_ATEICOL_) in October 1975. This cooperative
organisation was formed in 1971
by trade unions owing allegiance to the
Indian National Trade Union Congress
(INTUC) and it has around 60,000 members,
most of whom are tea garden workers. Based
in Dibrugarh, _ATEICOL_'s main purpose was
to carry and distribute foodgrains and
medical supplies to the plantations, open cooperative
stores and run small industries. It
bought over Woka Tea Estate because it was
running at a loss and was on the verge of
closure. All 585 workers of this plantation
are members of _ATEICOL_.

After _ATEICOL_ took over Woka the
plantation's condition improved rapidly. Till
1975 this tea garden had an annual production
of 2,20,000 kg of made tea (i e, around
9,90,000 kg of green leaves). Within a few
years of the take-over, production increased
to 3,00,000 kg (13,50,000 kg green leaves).
The co-operative also extended 42 hectares
of the garden's area under tea and overhauled
its factory by installing new machinery.
In addition, in 1985 a crash programme for
providing better housing facilities for the
workers was started and a deep tubewell was
dug to provide drinking water to the workers.
All this was managed with the minimum
financial help. The garden's main source of
finance was through _hypothecation_ of its
crop to a commercial bank. It had taken a
loan of Rs 14,00,000 from NABARD[^nabard] which
it has started repaying from 1987. Besides,
this, the garden has received no loan or subsidy
from any source.

[^nabard]: National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development.

However, in spite of this impressive record,
the garden's main failure is the lack of participation
by the workers in its management.
The management structure has remained unchanged,
with a professional manager at the
top issuing orders to workers who remain
passive recipients. The workers are not aware
that they are co-owners of this venture and
neither _ATEICOL_ nor their union seem
eager to make them understand the changed
situation. It would seem to them that a
more efficient management has taken over.
This defeats to some extent the basic purpose
of a co-operative. There is a clear difference
between ownership and control and
hence we find that though the condition of
the garden and its workers have improved,
the co-operative has not helped in changing
the outlook of the workers. The ideological
motivation of the other co-operatives is
obviously lacking in this case.

Plantation workers are the most backward
section of the workers in the organised sector.
Plantations are spread out and isolated,
giving the workers little opportunity to
interact with the outside world. The workers'
level of literacy is low and so is their wages.
The average monthly wage of a tea garden
worker is around Rs 400, which includes all
allowances and subsidies. This is less than
one-third of a coal miner's wage. Yet we find
cases of successful worker co-operatives in
this industry. In fact the experiences of the
workers in these co-operatives show that
even illiterate and backward workers are
capable of managing their own affairs when
given the opportunity and the ideological
motivation. These workers, for whom servility
and submission to the authority of
their managements had almost become a
way of life, have been able to manage their
plantations more efficiently than most professional
managements. Even the present setback
of the Saongaon co-operative is an indication
of its success because had it failed
the former owners would not have made a
bid to displace it. The commitment of the
workers to their co-operative during this
critical period is again largely shaped by the
ideological commitments of the co-operative.
The co-operatives in Tripura will be facing
a similar situation because the state government
has stopped all finances to them.[^/16]
This will be another test to show the
ideological commitment of these workers.


[^/1]: Hough, Eleanor, _The Co-operative Movement
in India_, Oxford University Press,
Calcutta 1966, p. 44.

[^/2]: National Co-operative Union of India
(_NCUI_), _Report of the Commission on Cooperative
Principles_ (Appointed by the International
Co-operative Alliance, London),
Delhi (date of publication not mentioned),
p. 10.

[^/3]: _Ibid_, pp. 46--47.

[^/4]: _Ibid_, p. 20.

[^/5]: Dubashi, P R, "Strategy of Co-operative
Development', in _Co-operation: An Interdisciplinary
Approach_, Vaikunth Mehta
Institute of Co-operative Management,
Pune, 1969, pp. 9--10.

[^/6]: Gadgil, DR, Towards a Co-operative Commonwealth,
Punjab University Publications
Bureau, Chandigrah, 1961, pp. 2--3.

[^/7]: _NCUI_, _op cit_, p. 10.

[^/8]: Cole, GDH, _Robert Owen_, Ernest Benn,
London, 1925.

[^/9]: Marx, K and Engels, F, _Selected Works_,
Vol II Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976,
p. 81 (emphasis in original).

[^/10]: _Ibid_, p. 82.

[^/11]: Lenin, VI, 'On Co-operation' in _The Land
Question and the Fight for Freedom_, Progress
Publishers, Moscow, 1975, p. 144.

[^/12]: Lenin, VI, 'The Question of Co-operative
Societies at the International Socialist Congress
in Copenhagen' in _Collected Works_,
Voi XVI, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
1966, p. 276.

[^/13]: _Ibid_.

[^/14]: Karve, DG, Reformulation of Co-operative
Principles' in _NCUI_, _op cit_.

[^/15]: Maslennikov, V, _The Co-operative Movement
in Asia and Africa_, Progress
Publishers, Moscow, 1983.

[^/16]: The chief minister announced this in the
Assembly on July 20, 1988.
