# Foreword

I had long feared that Arun Ferreira was going to end up on the front
pages. It had been more than a decade since I'd seen him, but news of
his activities would filter down through his brother, when I bumped into
him on the street. Arun, he'd told me, had devoted himself to community
organizing in Vidarbha, the drought-prone region in eastern Maharashtra
notorious for the frequency with which its farmers took their own lives.
When, in the early years of the new century, the state intensified its
campaign to quell all dissent against the greed-driven model of economic
development it had chosen for India, it seemed only a matter of time
before apostates like Arun would become victims of its zeal.

Still, this abstract dread for the safety for my college friend did
nothing to prepare me for the shock of actually seeing his photograph in
the newspapers one morning in May 2007 --- or at least seeing an image of
a squatting figure that the captions identified as Arun. Claiming that
he was a 'dreaded _Naxalite_', the photographs showed four men on their
haunches, seated at the feet of a triumphant posse of policemen in
Nagpur. The heads of the captives were concealed in hoods. Clearly, the
Maharashtra police had not found it necessary to pay attention to the
condemnation that swept the world upon the publication of the Abu Ghraib
photographs.

Over the next few days, the police invited more photographers to record
the evidence of their conquests, now with their faces unshrouded. Images
appeared in the papers of Arun with his hair in disarray, his eyes
betraying the trauma of the ingenious forms of torture to which he had
been subjected. Additional details about his alleged crimes were also
leaked to the press. The police announced that he was the chief of
propaganda and communications of the _Maoist_ party, a wily operative who
had an easy familiarity with sophisticated technology. They had come to
this conclusion because he had a pen drive in his pocket when they
arrested him.

Most often, a story about the arrest of a small band of _Naxalites_ would
have disappeared from the news cycle in a day or two. But this was
different. The reporters were astonished at the fact that Arun Ferreira
hailed from Bandra, the Mumbai neighbourhood that their articles
routinely and unimaginatively described as 'upmarket' or 'tony'. The
journalists seemed unable to understand how a man born to privilege had
decided to spend his life helping people less fortunate than he was.
This was something I knew a little about.

Long before soaring property prices transformed it into a neon-lit hub
of chic restaurants and fashion stores, Bandra was a haven for
middle-class Roman Catholics, who had laboured over the decades to
create a network of schools and hospitals, orphanages and social
institutions that were an admirable testament to their deep sense of
Christian duty. But since the 1970s, this approach to charity had been
the source of debate. The discussions had been catalysed by the
publication in 1971 of Chilean philosopher Gustavo Gutiérrez's _A
Theology of Liberation_.

The term 'development', Gutiérrez wrote, did not 'well express the
profound aspirations' of people in underdeveloped countries 'to
construct a just and fraternal society, where persons can live with
dignity and be agents of their own destiny'. A more appropriate word, he
suggested, was 'liberation', and went on to suggest a theoretical
framework that united the quest for liberation with the Christian
yearning for salvation.

As long-time residents of Bandra, Arun's family, like mine, were
familiar with these discussions. One of Arun's uncles was a priest with
strong views on the role the Church had in furthering the goal of social
justice. By the 1980s, in the wake of the Emergency, several young
Bombay Catholics who had come to an understanding of India's power
dynamics as members of an organization called All-India Catholic
University Federation had thrown in their lot with trade unions and
human rights organizations. Arun was heir to this tradition. Not
everyone chose to fight the battle outside the umbrella of the church.
Shortly after Arun was finally cleared of all criminal charges, one of
his neighbours on St Martin's Road, John Rodrigues, a man about the same
age as us, was appointed a bishop.

When Arun dropped by to see me a few weeks after he'd obtained bail, 4
years and 8 months after being arrested, I thought he'd be
contemplative, perhaps even bitter, at having been wrongly confined for
so long. Instead, his wide smile and his infectious optimism filled the
room. He'd brought along sketches he'd made of prison life and wanted
advice on publishing them as a pamphlet. But as he began to narrate the
stories behind each drawing, I knew that his experience was too vast to
be confined to a mere booklet. I bullied him into expanding the scope of
his text. He'd hoped to see the fruits of his labour in two months. Two
years on, it's finally on the shelves.

India has very few documents of life in its horrific jails, and few as
searing as this. If there's any silver lining to be found in Arun's
experience, it's that he emerged seemingly unscathed. As a resurgent
India throws its weight solidly behind a monochromatic vision of
economic development, Arun Ferreira reminds us that diversity of opinion
and debate are essential for any society to flourish. The worst thing we
can do to ourselves is to imprison our imaginations.


|
| Bombay, July 2014
| Naresh Fernandes
