In watching the effects of supervisory
training we find that all too often the results are not
up to expectations. While some of this may be blamed
on the training itself or upon the ability of the foreman,
in many cases it seems that the foreman is responding
quite directly to his own work situation. In
other words, if the foreman acts in arbitrary and
inconsiderate fashion because that is the way he feels
he is treated and if he thinks he is expected to act
that way, no amount of supervisory training is apt to
change him. In fact the foreman's cry of "why don't
you give this to our bosses" is a common response
to any training in how to deal with people. Thus he
feels that he is doing the best he can, that he wants
to be friendly and considerate to his subordinates,
but conditions beyond his control prevent it.

Furthermore, interviews with foremen
concerning the problems of their jobs show that there
is a great deal of anxiety and disturbance at this
level. Many feel that they are ignored by management,
that they are unable to communicate their
problems and difficulties to their superiors, that on
the whole they work mighty hard and do a lot of worrying
for very little recognition or reward.

In seeking the sources of these problems we
see a number of general conditions extending throughout
industry which have serious effects upon the
foreman.

# THE RATE OF TECHNICAL DEVELOPMENT

The high rate of technical change has resulted
in a great instability of processes and work
routines. New processes require new knowledge and
the foreman whose technical understanding is based
on shop experience of twenty or even ten years ago
may be lost when dealing with modern developments.
For example, an experienced foreman on prewar
radio work may be completely at sea when he meets
the technical problems of radar assembly.

Technical change also means changes in
work groups and instability and feelings of insecurity
among the workers. Every major improvement in
processes usually means changes for the workers.
Old skills become obsolete, old work groups may be
dispersed, new people with new skills may rise to
positions of importance. All this leads to anxiety
and insecurity among workers since no man can feel
secure if the skill upon which he depends for both
status and livelihood and which he acquired through
years of training and experience can be wiped out
over night by a new process or a better machine.

In general, technical change is taken for
granted and little thought is given to its effect upon
the foreman. Yet he is the one who must put the
changes into effect, he must overcome the resistance
of the workers, he must make the changes and yet
hold the group together as an effective working unit.
And the more rapid the rate of change, the more difficult
his job becomes.

# THE INCREASING SPREAD OF UNIONS

The organization of the workers gives
them a means of participating in many decisions of
management and enables them to prevent the arbitrary
use of authority. In every case, with the introduction
of a union, the foreman faces more restriction
of his action and authority; he must accept
the agreements reached between management and the
union regardless of their effect on him. As a result
he almost always feels that he is caught in the middle
and the greater the conflict between the union and
management, the more difficult is his position.

When a plant is first organized, the foremen
go through a very trying period of adjustment.
Especially if management has opposed the union, the
workers may express resentment through complaints
against the foremen and the foremen feel very exposed
and defenseless against such attacks. In any
case, they must develop proper relations with the
union officials and it often takes some time for them
to learn just how to deal with the new situation. And
during this period management is often very critical
of any mistakes and is irritated if the foreman gives
the union any cause for complaint.

In general, once the union is established,
the foreman prefers to work out a comfortable, cooperative
relation with the steward or other officials.
If he manages this he can then attend to his
main job of running his department smoothly and efficiently.
In many cases, however, he fears that
management is opposed to the union and will frown
on too much cooperation between foremen and stewards.
This fear always creates problems in his relations
with the union and is a constant source of
anxiety.

# WARTIME CONDITIONS

The war has been a very disturbing factor
to the foreman. It has been a period of extreme instability
in almost every respect. Conversion to
war production has for many plants completely disrupted
all the customary organization and work routines.
There has been a high rate of technical change
involving new products, materials or processes.
There has been constant labor shortage and high
turnover which disrupted old work groups, At the
same time there has been constant pressure from
management to increase output in spite of shortages
of labor, material and equipment. And coupled with
this has been a rapid spread of unions under aggressive
leadership. All this has increased the problems
of the foreman, intensified his feelings of being
in the middle, and generally resulted in anxiety, dissatisfaction
and poor morale.

Of course, the conditions have not affected
all plants and all foremen equally. Some concerns
have been little affected by technical change, or it
has only touched certain departments, Many have
either been organized so long that there has been
complete adjustment to union restrictions or have
not yet been organized. Others have made no significant
change of product or methods to meet wartime
demands. Probably all, however, have faced
pressure for more output, coupled with turnover and
material shortages.

Under more stable conditions the foreman
is able to develop routine ways of handling the job
and of dealing with people. The gang gradually becomes
accustomed to him and he knows what to expect
from them. He is thoroughly familiar with the
work and its problems and knows exactly what can
be done. He also knows what to expect from his superiors,
how to satisfy their demands or protect
himself from their pressure. But under present
conditions, nothing is stable; the jobs change, what
is right today may be wrong tomorrow, people come
and go too rapidly to establish smooth working relationships
with the foreman or each other. Management
demands more and more output and the union
demands more consideration of the worker's feeling
at a time when the foreman is overwhelmed with
problems of production. Is it any wonder that he
often feels lost and helpless, that he develops extreme
anxieties, and that he wonders if the job is
worth the effort?

# ATTITUDES OF MANAGEMENT AND WORKERS

Those in top management often think or
speak of the foreman as being part of management
and as being their representative who deals directly
with the worker and the job. Probably it is more
accurate to think of him as being the agent of management
who carries out their decisions and not as
an actual part of management who participates in the
decisions. Thus, if management signs a union contract,
the foreman is expected to accept its provisions;
if management makes commitments to the
customer, the foreman is expected to produce the
goods. And, in some concerns, the ideal foreman is
a "good soldier," one who accepts and carries out
his orders without question or criticism.

The attitude of top management toward the
foreman can be seen in the subject matter of supervisory
training courses. In many, a major portion
of the time is devoted to instruction in company policies
and techniques, and some state definitely that
one of the chief problems of the new foreman is the
acquisition of a new point of view: that of management.

To the workers the foreman is definitely
a part of management; he is the boss. This is clearly
shown by the fact that many unions will not accept
him as a member. And between him and the worker
his identification with management stands as a sharp
barrier. As one worker said:

>You can't talk about this sort of thing with
the boss, After all, he's part of management;
and you couldn't expect him to see things as we
do. He's a good enough guy, as far as that goes,
but he's a 'management man.'

## How the Foreman Sees His Job

The foreman feels that he is the guy in
the middle. He is caught between management and
the job and must take it from both sides. As one
said:

>I'll tell you one thing that you can put down
in your little black book, and I want you to remember
this, and that is that the supervisor is a
'bumping post'. That's something you can remember,
he's a 'bumping post,' because he's in
the middle; he has to take it from both ends; and
those running the place don't give him any credit
for it.

At the same time, he feels that management
is unaware of the difficulties of this position and instead
of trying to ease the strains constantly adds to
it:

>This is just between you and me. If I had
>my way about it, I would like to be back on my
>old job. Those guys just sit up there, with no
>idea of what we really have to work with. They
>come down and say we have to step up production,
>but they never stop to figure out with you how it's
>going to be done.
>
>***
>
>They put one job after another in here.
>Just about the time we get one figured out, they've
>got another one for us to do. No one ever takes
>the time to discuss the situation with you; we're
>just supposed to figure it out ourselves, I guess.
>We have a hell of a lot of stuff to scrap and waste
>to throw out, and this makes everyone on the job
>wonder what it's all about. You can't blame
>them, but what're you going to tell them?
>
>***
>
>I can't figure this situation out. Everyone
>knows that we're in a mess down here, but the big
>shots walk around with their heads up in the air,
>like you weren't around. They tell you that they
>want this and that done, but they never sit down
>with you and try to make any plans. If we had a
>little cooperation around here and everyone would
>try to do a little planning together, we'd be a hell
>of a lot better off.
>
>***
>
>When you get right down to it, the supervisor
>really doesn't have very much to say. He
>just tries to keep everybody happy down here,
>but he can't say anything to management, if it's
>doing something that's not going to work out for
>the best interest of everybody concerned.

Thus, the foreman feels that he is constantly faced
with demands from his superiors, decisions which
they make that he must carry out. And yet, in many
cases, he feels that they do not give him the necessary
authority and control over the work situation to
get the job done. In some instances, he is being
constantly checked by superiors or by other organizations;
and he is in a constant state of anxiety and
frustration.

>You don't know where you stand. It's a
>hell of a situation, because I get on edge and blow
>my top and say things that I really didn't mean to
>say. The trouble is, you don't know what to do
>about it; I'm supposed to be the one in charge of
>my department; but the way things go, no one
>would ever know it.
>
>***
>
>Well, I gave a ______ job to do the other day,
>and he said that he wasn't hired to do that sort of
>thing. I tried to tell him that that was part of his
>job, but he wouldn't pay any attention to me. I
>don't know exactly what happened; I think I was
>called out of the shop. When I came back, here
>was ______ just coming out of the boss' office;
>and he was whistling as though everything was all
>set. Well, he'd gone into the boss and had told
>him that I was making him do something that he
>was not supposed to do; and he got some sort of
>consideration out of the boss. When I went in,
>the boss asked me what it was all about; and I
>told him just how it happened --- the guy refused to
>do a job I assigned to him, All he said was that
>______ was supposed to be a ______, and he wasn't
>supposed to do these other jobs. That's something
>I can't see.

Of course not every foreman finds himself
in such a position. Some fortunate ones feel that
they do have freedom and authority to run the job,
without constant interference from above.

>I realize that I haven't been around here
>very long ... but I do know what I'm after ...
>The last place I worked before coming here, you
>couldn't do a thing without having somebody in
>the place call you on it. You were dogged from
>the time you came in the morning until the
>time you left at night. I got my belly full on that
>sort of stuff, and I made up my mind that I would
>never do it again. So, when I came in here, I told
>my boss exactly how I felt about the situation. I
>told him that I realized that I had a job to do, but
>I wanted to do it in my way ... I don't mind having
>people try to point out to me where I'm wrong,
>but I don't want them to try to tell me ... If
>you've got to go through life doing what the other
>fellow says, just because he says it, there isn't
>any percentage in that.
>
>***
>
>I handle this department down here just as
>though it were my own business, and I'm getting
>just as much kick out of it as though it were my
>own business, I guess it's been fortunate for me
>that I have a boss who feels the same way about
>things that I do, so we're able to get along all
>right.

## Loss of Authority

In watching developments over a period of
time, we often see a steady pinching away of the
foreman's authority, a gradual reduction in his right
to make decisions and a more rigid policing of the
decisions he still makes.

These changes, within industry as a whole,
have shaken the foreman's feelings of security as a
part of management; for various rights or powers
which have been traditionally associated with the position
and authority of the foreman, have been shifted
to other spots in the company structure. One of the
most commonly mentioned losses is the power to
hire and fire. This was formerly thought indispensable
to the foreman if he were to maintain his authority
and prestige with his work force. With the
establishment and extension of employment and personnel
procedures, the process of hiring and firing
has been almost entirely removed from the hands of
the foreman, and this loss has been felt very keenly.
Programs for personnel selection, training and adjustment
require technical services which the foreman
cannot be expected to perform as adequately as
a specialist. Nevertheless, the fact remains that
the foreman has been deprived of a major power and,
as a consequence, feels a sense of insecurity in his
relations with the workers under his direction. The
following statement reveals some of the frustration
that is felt:

>What are you going to do? Your hands are
tied everytime you turn around. I've got to get
this job out, and if I don't have the people, it just
isn't done. So, I just try to keep telling them
that it's important to come in to work. I've had
Saturdays when there's been more than half of
my gang out; and it don't do me a damn bit of
good to say anything about it. I might just as
well not be here.

In some cases, cooperation between the foreman and
the personnel officers has taken the form of permitting
the foreman to do the actual job of telling a
worker that he is fired. This does enable the foreman
to maintain the external appearance of authority,
yet the foreman and the worker know that the decision
to fire does not rest with the foreman alone,
but depends upon agreement with the personnel office
and, in many cases, the union representatives.

The loss of authority over his workers by
the foreman has been accentuated by the establishment
of strong union organizations. Unionization has
set restrictions over the way he handles his people
or moves them from job to job, or gives raises or
promotions. In some cases the growth of the union
has strengthened the hand of the personnel officer,
by forcing the foreman to consult with the latter department
before dismissing any worker, The following
is a statement by a personnel manager:

>_Interviewer_: How is it that you now have authority
>over the hiring and firing? Is that the result
>of some general company policy?
>
>_Manager_: Well, yes, partly. It is a matter of
>company policy, but more than that, I think it is
>the fact that we have a more efficient union here
>now. You see, we had the union come in here a
>couple of years ago, but for awhile the people who
>were elected officers did not quite know how to
>run the thing and they did not realize what powers
>they had in their hands. Within the last couple
>years, though, they have realized what they can
>do, and have put pressure on the foremen and
>everyone else now. After the foremen have tried
>to exert their power a couple of times and find it
>doesn't work, then they swing into line and cooperate
>with us. It was a pretty hard blow to them,
>but there was nothing they could do about it, and
>now, we don't have very much trouble. They
>more or less accept the new system of doing
>things.

## Pressure on the Foreman

Not all pressures come from the union or
as a result of disturbances in the work group. A
surprisingly large number arise out of the attempts
of management to control the technical functioning
of the concern. For example, in attempting to obtain
technical improvement, management often sets
up a laboratory or an engineering organization. These
technical organizations are always trying to bring
new equipment or methods into the shop; and, in their
interest in such improvements, they often seem to
the foreman to be completely indifferent to the effect
upon his work group and his job.

>We let that guy come in here, and we cooperated
in every way we could; then he turns
around and makes a report about how my gang
plays around. We can complain until the cows
come home about the way these jobs are laid out
and nobody pays any attention, but just let an upstart
engineer make a report and he gets a
feather in his cap --- we get the dirty end of the
stick.

Management's concern with costs and their
cost control systems and devices gives rise to considerable
pressure upon the foreman. Where cost
reports are used by management as the basis for
evaluation of the performance of the shop, the foreman
usually shows anxiety concerning the reports or
develops methods of defending himself against them.
In some cases management makes decisions based
on factors not directly concerning the shop and yet
the effects on the work situation may be serious,
For example, in one situation top management decided
to cut the inventories of raw materials in anticipation
of a drop in prices. The purchasing department
obeyed the order literally and tried to reduce
inventory to the point where there was often
only about one day's stock on hand. Due to uncertain
deliveries from the supplier, this meant that the shop
ran "from hand to mouth", with increasing delays due
to material shortage. To the foreman this seemed
to be a rather arbitrary order carried out in an unintelligent
manner. At the same time he was being
pushed for production; and he felt that management
was, on one hand, demanding more output, yet at the
same time setting up obstacles which would prevent
it, Yet he would be judged on the way he made deliveries.

In some cases the cost control system may
operate as a constant policeman over even minor
details of the operation. With such a system the cost
clerks are usually right in the department and this
is sometimes a source of disturbance and anxiety.

>_Foreman_: Now the cost clerks have moved in
>there and decided to run things, as they always
>do.
>
>_Interviewer_: You seem to feel that the cost control
>department is interfering with the work of
>your department.
>
>_Foreman_: Well, it's that way all the time around
>here, You'll find that the other foremen gripe
>about it, too. That gang comes around all the
>time, trying to check up on us. They don't trust
>us at all, and we don't trust them either. You know,
>when people have to snoop around on other people,
>you know they must be rather crooked themselves,
>don't you think so? They are always worried if
>somebody seems to be getting too much money.
>Now you know, we have a system of bonus payments
>here. You have to do that, you know, in order to get
>the maximum work out of people. Well, I had one
>girl here, she was the best worker I ever had.
>She was very efficient and had a lot of push and
>was able to earn a pretty high bonus. You know,
>the cost control sets the rate at so much and this
>girl was able to work up almost twice that much.
>I don't know how she was able to do it, but that's
>what she did, Well, the cost control department
>came around and said that something must be
>wrong there. I showed them the work that she
>had put out and asked them if it was all right.
>
>They had to say that it was o.k. It measured up
>to their rates, but they still wouldn't believe that
>she had done that. They thought that I was trying
>to put something over on them, or she was putting
>something over on me. They have their own
>checkers down here now to keep track of that
>sort of thing, but they don't trust them either.
>They don't trust anybody, not even themselves.
>
>You know, it used to be that I would figure out all
>the overtime and bonus payments and I would do
>that myself and nobody ever complained, but now
>the cost control department has to do that all
>themselves. They just don't trust anybody. They
>always think that somebody is trying to put
>something over on them. Now, I can't blame
>them for wanting to keep the costs down. That's
>their job and they're entitled to do that, but they
>just can't be trusted. Why they even had fellows
>coming around to check up on the foreman.
>
>Then another thing is that I can't do any hiring
>any more. It used to be, you know, that a foreman
>could hire and fire the people in his department
>but now that has to be taken care of through
>the personnel office. Another thing that has
>changed is that I used to be able to set the rates
>here for the different jobs and now that is all
>done by the cost control department, and I can't
>change anything about it. We have an incentive
>system, but it doesn't seem to work very well
>with the new employees. They are not particularly
>concerned with their jobs and they don't
>have any seniority. Time and again I have explained
>to these people that if they wanted to work
>a little bit harder there would be more money
>waiting for them, but it usually doesn't seem to
>make much difference with them. Now with the
>the old timers it is different. You can get them
>on the jobs that they like and they will really
>work hard at it.

Of course such complaints and especially
the criticism of management cannot be taken at their
face value. Certainly the foremen often think that
management acts in arbitrary or thoughtless ways,
giving little consideration to the effect upon the foreman.
And, from where he sits, such interpretations
may appear quite reasonable. In watching management
make decisions, however, it is clear that decisions
are not as arbitrary as they often appear to
the foreman. Nevertheless, two things do stand out:

1. That any decision or action on the part of management
is apt to have extensive and often unforeseen
effects upon the work situation and upon the
foreman.

2. That even where the effects are anticipated,
management often fails to explain the reasons for the
action or to take steps to reassure or assist the foreman.

# THE FOREMAN AND THE WORKERS

The foremen often show some concern over
their relation with the workers, and many have developed
definite ideas as to how a foreman must act.
Often he is uncertain as to what constitutes a "real"
leader; he wonders "Should I be a good guy and mix
with my people, or should I maintain my position as
a supervisor?" There seems to be no accepted answer
to this question, and it is a frequent topic of
discussion.

>There is one thing I have wondered about.
>I sometimes think I'm right and then I'm not
>sure. I get right down and work with my gang.
>Some people tell you that isn't the way for a foreman
>to do, but I can't see it that way. I can't
>just walk around the room all the time, not doing
>anything. If I get to it and do some of the things
>myself, the time goes faster; and I think the people
>have more respect for you, too. I know, I've
>been called on the carpet for being too friendly
>and associating with my people, but I think I did
>right, don't you?
>
>***
>
>This job's damn important to me. That's
>why I'm spending so much time just trying to get
>acquainted with everyone and learning what goes
>on down here. If these people don't have the
>feeling that I know what it's all about, they're
>never going to work for me.
>
>***
>
>You've got to have loyalty, but most of them
>don't know what that means. What none of these
>people have had is discipline. By that I don't
>mean holding their noses to the grindstone. That
>idea has long since passed out of the picture. I
>do mean that they should have some idea of order
>and system; and they should have respect for
>the man they're working for.
>
>***
>
>This business of thinking that your people
>are working for you is no good. The only way
>you're really going to get things done is to have
>them feel that they're working with you. I want
>my people to feel that they can come to me and
>talk about anything; and that's the way it is. I
>could tell you a lot of personal things they've come
>to me to talk about.

It is interesting to note that the position that
the foreman takes on this question often reflects the
general attitude of the plant in which he works. If
the atmosphere in the plant is formal with little give
and take between levels, he feels it necessary to
maintain his authority and will cite cases to show
that "if you treat people too nice they'll walk over
you." If the atmosphere is more casual with considerable
informal exchange up and down the line, his
authority often rests more lightly upon him.

# RESISTANCE TO CHANGE

One thing on which management sometimes
comments is the tendency on the part of some
foremen and even of some organizations to cling to
the old ways and refuse to accept the new. This may
range from passive resistance in which there is a
general indifference to the new ideas so that nothing
is ever done about them to active denial of the value
of the new. In some cases a department may be
constantly alert to defend itself against anything new
whether it comes from engineers, accountants
personnel people.

A certain amount of such resistance can
probably always be expected. Certainly any change
means a period of difficulty and adjustment and the
average person prefers to keep everything running
smoothly in the customary grooves. Where the resistance
is excessive, however, the foremen often
show a strong distrust of management, feel that they
are subject to arbitrary demands from above and
that they are given no consideration. Then management
complains about the "old fogies" and talks about
the need for proper training.

In many such cases, however, training
does not solve the problem. It seems that the real
problem lies in the relations between the foreman
and management rather than in the state of knowledge
of the foreman. In these situations all the attempts
at foreman training, usually have little effect in
changing the attitudes or behavior of foremen and
always fall far short of the hopes of management.

# THE INSECURITY AND ANXIETIES OF THE FOREMAN

Again and again in interviews the foreman
express uncertainty and anxiety as to how they
stand with their superiors. Sudden changes take
place and they worry about their future and wonder
if they should start looking around for another
place.

>They just leave you hanging out on a limb.
I walked in here Monday morning, and they told
me that this whole set-up was going to be transferred.
Not a word was said about it to me before.
That's a hell of a note. Apparently they
forget all about the things you've done around
this place for twenty-five years. It gets damn
discouraging. We worked like hell for nine
months, getting this job whipped into shape; everyone
of us worked overtime; and I was down
here most of the Sundays. Now where am I?

In this statement the cry that "not a word
was said to me before" is important. Nearly every
foreman can tell of cases where important changes
take place, but management fails either to discuss
them with him or even inform him of what to expect.
As a representative of management, he feels that at
least he should be kept informed, and certainly for
his own prestige it is important that he be able to
explain things to his workers. In fact, one of the
problems of a union shop is the fact that often the
workers know of management decisions before the
foreman is informed by his superiors. And, in many
cases, he must get his information on such matters
through the shop steward instead of from management.

Another sore point in many plants is the
matter of foreman's pay. There they have been
classed as executive and are not paid overtime, they
often find themselves working longer hours and carrying
more responsibilities than ever and yet being
paid little more, and sometimes less than the men
they supervise. This in turn lessens the prestige of
the job and makes them wonder where they stand
with management.

While the foremen have been discussed as
a uniform group, obviously there are actually many
differences among them. For one thing, there are
significant differences arising out of experiences
and training with a variation between the old-timers
with wide experience in many types of situations,
the old-timers whose experience has been limited
to only a few types of work, the newcomers with
limited experience, and little training, or the newcomers
with formal training.

In general, it seems to be the old-timers,
whose experience has been confined to one industry
and whose formal training is very slight, who manifest
the most insecurity and feel most keenly any
threat to their position or authority. As one of them
put it:

>These kids are smart, too, and they're
learning things now that are going to put them so
far ahead of us old bucks that we just won't have
a chance. I suppose management will just slowly
push us old-timers in the background, and before
we know it we'll be shelved.

These men are inclined to be defensive of their positions
and react sharply to management's formalized
controls or "new-fangled ideas." The foreman,
who expressed himself so strongly about the supervisor
being a "bumping post," jumped to his own defense
in explaining the work done in his department:

>We really got out production here, and I
don't think that I've slowed down any in all the
years that I've been at the job. There are several
records around here that they'll have to shoot
for. I guess that'll be something that I'll leave
behind to be remembered by.

Another old-timer expressed himself rather cynically
about the question of "getting ahead".

>That's the question that all of the bosses
ought to be asking themselves. What does make
a good foreman? As far as I've been able to
tell, since I've been working, it's 'who you know'
and not 'what you know' that counts. I was talking
to my wife about it when we were on our vacation,
and I said that the only way a man could
get ahead was to have a friend or a relative in
the front office; and I really believe I'm right
about that.

In a somewhat different fashion, the relative
newcomer, whose chief source of strength is aptitude
and ambition, is inclined to manifest a feeling
of insecurity. He is strongly conscious of his lack
of formal training, and it is not uncommon to hear
him say: "You might as well make hay, while you
can, I know damn well that just as soon as this war's
over we'll all be back on the machines or on the
bench; so you might just as well get all you can now."

As might be expected, the old-timer with
broad experience and the newcomer with formal
training seem to be much less concerned about the
course of events. They seem to do a normal amount
of griping about "the state of the nation," but they
seldom reflect an attitude of being "pushed around."
In talking about the war situation, one young foreman
said:

>I know we've had a lot of trouble since the
war began. There's been an awful lot of pressure
put on management, and I think that it's been good
for us. I know that I've learned a lot since going
through this experience. It's taught a lot of us
that we can't be so dictatorial and run things without
taking the other fellow into consideration,
That might sound sort of funny to hear me say
that, but I just had an experience the other day
that really opened my eyes. I had a fellow who
works for me tell me that when I came in here,
he couldn't stand me, but that he really likes to
work for me now.

It was in observing the behavior and actions
of these foremen and not in listening to them
talk that suggested the relative significance of their
attitudes to the relationship between themselves and
top management. The more secure were those who
had the most frequent interaction and exchange with
their superiors. When uncertain about their job or
their position, they were apt to go to their superior
with their worries and would be reassured. On the
other hand, those less secure were the ones who had
infrequent contacts with their superiors, and then
chiefly on business. These were reluctant to approach
their superiors with their problems and so instead
of "having things out" just sat back and worried.

It is clear that under present conditions
the life of the foreman is difficult and it is impossible
to relieve him of all the pressures. It is equally
obvious that he often feels that management has
let him down; that those he should look to for relief
and reassurance are indifferent to his problems and
critical of his performance. And it is also clear
that he is, both in his feelings and in fact, quite cut
off from the higher levels.

Much of this problem can be expressed as
a problem in communication, The foreman often
misunderstands and resists the decisions from above
because he is not kept informed, Outstanding foremen
have been observed in an agony of apprehension
as to their standing because they did not know the
basis on which they were judged.

>You wouldn't mind the grief so much, if
>you felt that someone was really appreciating
>your work. If they'd give you a little recognition,
>it wouldn't be so bad. No one ever thinks
>about coming around to give you a pat on the
>back.
>
>***
>
>The thing that gets you down is that you
>don't hear how you're being evaluated ... As
>things now stand, they (the superiors) have actual
>contact with us here only about twice a year,
>and then when they do come in, it's only for a
>couple of days; and they're interested in hearing
>only the high spots; so we don't feel that a great
>deal is accomplished.

Foremen ask, "How can the boss judge us
when he seldom sees us?" And this complaint becomes
stronger in the larger companies with many
levels of authority where "your own boss may know
but it's his boss that makes the decision."

To sum it up, the foreman today finds his
supervisory job more difficult than ever before, and
at the same time he does not know where he stands
with management, and he feels that management does
not understand his problems. In this situation, he
feels insecure and full of anxieties. Facing new
pressures with such inadequate support, it is hardly
surprising that he is unable to do the supervisory
job management expects of him.

# CONCLUSION

It has been shown that the major forces of
cohesion and disruption in the work situation are to
be found in human relations and that the behavior of
the first line supervisor may largely determine the
extent of cooperation or friction between workers and
management.

The skillful supervisor builds a cohesive
work group. He thinks and acts in terms of teamwork,
He builds up a free and informal system of
two-way communication between himself and the
workers. He does good turns for them, unobtrusively,
as a natural part of his behavior, and they reciprocate.
He originates action for them with confidence
and decision.

One of the most salient characteristics
of the effective supervisor is that he thinks in terms
of a two-way adjustment between himself and his
subordinates. He does not expect subordinates to
adjust to him simply because he has authority over
them. He knows that to be effective he must win
their support, and he knows that that support can
only be won through human relations. He is able to
think and act in terms of the sort of human relations
picture presented here.

Furthermore, he knows that the behavior
and attitudes of his employees can be changed, when
that is desirable. He knows that he can take apparently
hostile workers and turn them into conscientious
and cooperative employees --- if he establishes
the right sort of human relations with them. Instead
of trying simply to lay the blame for shortcomings,
he thinks in terms of human adjustments.

Throughout this discussion, we have made
no mention of the question of how strict or lenient a
supervisor should be, for we find that the supervisor
who judges his performance primarily in those
terms is not doing an effective job. There are many
supervisors who know quite well that they are unpopular
with their subordinates, but who defend themselves
by saying that they have to be in order to enforce
the strict standards of performance they believe
in. The implication is that if they were willing
to be lax about their work, they could be popular.

Such a viewpoint is fundamentally unsound,
We have observed supervisors who were rated as
strict by their subordinates yet who were also highly
popular. And we have observed lenient and lax supervisors
who were not popular and respected. It is
clear that the supervisor cannot become popular
simply by being strict or lax with his employees.
Whether he wins their loyalty will depend upon the
sort of human relations he builds up between himself
and them.

The morale of the industrial organization
rests primarily upon a system of personal loyalties.
That is not all, for the worker who has had satisfactory
experiences with the people in his company over
a period of time develops certain abstract loyalties
to the company, its name, its buildings, and its products,
and these loyalties may be strong enough to
survive several ineffective supervisors. However,
in the long run, loyalty to the company is dependent
upon loyalty to the people in it and can only be built
out of personal loyalties.

Some executives would prefer not to recognize
this connection. When a supervisor quits and
several workers follow him out of the company, the
manager may say, "That just proves that the foreman
was only building loyalty to himself. If he had built
loyalty to the company, those men would still be
with us,"

Now, if the workers were divided into two
cliques, one of them specially favored by the foreman,
and the workers who quit were from that clique,
then management has legitimate cause to criticize
the foreman and may indeed be better off without
him. However, if all the workers were strong for
the foreman, then management can hardly regard
such loyalty as a liability to the company. Instead,
it is up to management to seek to develop with its
foremen the same sort of ties of loyalty that the
workers felt toward the supervisor in this case.

We see, therefore, that even while talking
about relations between supervisors and workers, we
cannot solve the problem of building morale and
teamwork among employees without considering the
problems the foreman faces in relation to management.

We have seen that the foreman has been
faced with a number of difficult adjustments. Rapid
technological changes have taxed his ability to the
utmost. He has had to get along with many new workers
and new groups of workers. The growth of labor
unions has greatly restricted his freedom of
action in dealing with workers. And finally he has
been under greater pressure than ever to get out the
production.

As a result of these conditions, the foremen
feel that their place and status in the organization
is changing. Instead of going ahead to greater
security and prestige, they are slipping backward.
And at a time when everything in the work situation
conspires to make his job more difficult, the ones
he feels he should be able to look to for support in
times of trouble, his superiors, are becoming more
inaccessible and more critical. Out of this grows
increasing anxieties and dissatisfaction; the feeling
that the job is not worth the effort, or that their only
hope lies in organization at their own level.

Management considers the foreman part
of management, but the foreman does not know where
he stands. He is told what to do, and he is seldom
consulted by his superiors. In many cases he feels
that he is just a "bumping post" between management
and the workers. Working under such pressure and
with such anxieties over his position, the foreman is
not able to do his job at full efficiency.

What can be done to improve the performance
of the foreman?

It may be useful to teach foremen some of
the fundamentals of human relations as we have been
discussing them here, but such instruction alone, no
matter how skillfully given, will not begin to meet
the need, Like other people, foremen do not learn
how to behave through reading books or attending
classes. They are influenced primarily by their experience
in human relations --- and they are most responsive
to the behavior of their superiors in the organization.

Good supervision is not simply a matter of
the relationship between foremen and workers. It involves
the whole industrial organization, from top to
bottom. It is the responsibility of the executives to
build an organization in which foremen can supervise
effectively. Only under those circumstances will
foremen be able to profit from studying the techniques
of handling human relations.

While we have been discussing effective
supervision in terms of the relations between foreman
and workers, it should be emphasized that the same
general conclusions apply to the relations between executives
and line supervisors.

The top executives can conduct themselves
so as to improve the quality of supervision all down
the line or so as to make effective supervision of
workers virtually impossible.

Suppose top management puts pressure on
foremen to maintain their dignity and keep aloof from
the workers --- as many managements do in the mistaken
belief that such conduct is necessary to build
respect. Then the foreman cannot build up informal
contacts with workers and do them good turns without
jeopardizing his chances of advancement, if not
his position itself.

Suppose top management is very active in
issuing orders but makes no provision for upward
communication from line supervisors.' Then the
foreman cannot encourage the workers to come to
him with complaints and suggestions, because he
knows very well that he can't do anything about
them --- and the workers know it too, so they lose interest
in talking to him.

Many managements have recognized the
gulf that has grown up between themselves and their
foremen and have tried to bridge it by sending out
pamphlets, form letters, and other literature explaining
management's policies and point of view and
discussing the functions of the foreman. Such an
approach is generally ineffective, and we know of
cases in which the circularization was hotly resented
by the foremen.

It is useless to try to devise more persuasive
channels of one-way communication from management
to foremen when the great need is for the
development of free flowing channels of two-way
communication.

Such communication is essential for building
up the morale of the foreman group.

Where decisions are made and expected to
be carried out without discussion and preparation up
and down the line, morale of foremen is apt to be
poor. Where problems are discussed and foremen
are allowed to express their ideas before decisions
are made, or even where any change is presented
personally and explained beforehand, morale is better.

Also important is the extent to which executives
show that they recognize the problems of the
foreman. It is not enough for them to be aware of the
foreman and his difficulties, They must let him know
that they know. This can only come about through frequent
contact and discussion and through careful attempts
to keep him informed as to what is back of decisions.

Finally, the amount of direct and friendly
contact with superiors is important. Frequent contact,
especially if it is friendly and helpful, lessens
the anxieties and opens the channels for freer communication.
It is always easier to tell your troubles
to someone you know and who is friendly. If, however,
the superior tends to be a policeman in his contacts,
always faultfinding or making demands, then
frequent contacts lower morale.

Unless the line of communication is clear
of obstructions at every level, the first line supervisor
cannot function at maximum efficiency in making
human adjustments, Effective supervision begins
at the top. If it does not begin there, it is useless
to expect much through supervisory training or
through building up the personnel organization and its
functions.

# SUMMARY

To understand the foreman's problems,
we need to observe him in his relations with the
workers and also in his relations with those above
him in the management structure.

Turning first to his problems in supervising
workers, we analyze the human elements in
effective supervision under four headings:

1. The skillful supervisor thinks and acts in
terms of teamwork. He builds up cooperative relations
not only between himself and the workers but
also acts so as to stimulate cooperation among the
workers.
2. He builds up a free and informal system of
two-way communication between himself and the
workers.
3. He builds up a feeling of mutual responsibility
between himself and the workers such that there
is an easy give and take in the matter of helping
each other.
4. He originates action for the workers with confidence
and decision.

The foreman today is faced with a number
of difficult problems which make it difficult for him
to handle his workers skillfully. Rapid technological
changes have taxed his ability to the utmost. He has
had to get along with many new workers and new
groups of workers. The growth of labor unions has
greatly restricted his freedom of action in dealing
with the workers, And finally, he has been under
greater pressure than ever to get out production.

The foreman might be able to cope with
all these problems if he felt secure in his relations
to his superiors. Management says that he is a part
of management, but the foreman does not know where
he stands. He is told what to do and is seldom consulted
by his superiors. In many cases he feels that
he is just a "bumping post" between management and
the workers. Troubled with such anxieties, he is not
able to function with the efficiency management expects
of him.

The performance of the foreman can be
improved if management applies to its dealings with
him the human elements of effective supervision,
which we have here presented. It is especially important
to the foreman's morale that he be frequently
consulted by his superiors and have changes presented
to him in person and discussed with him before
they are put into effect. For the morale of the
organization, effective two-way communication is
important at every level.
