_Law enforcement involves the twin objectives of prevention and punishment.
Criminal and conviction records are often used as parameters to determine the
punishment appropriate for an offender. This article considers constitutional
issues that arise from the creation of arrest records and police intelligence files,
and the resulting stigma attached to the names contained therein. By discussing
the use of these investigative aids, and highlighting the dissonance between the
records and actual convictions, the article makes a case against the use of these
records in ways that incorrectly stigmatise members of civil society. It concludes
by suggesting models by which the benefits of investigative records can be
availed of, without the wrongful stigmatisation of the persons names therein._

\ 


# INTRODUCTION

The criminal justice system, at every step of the process, creates and uses all
sorts of criminal records. Unquestionably, such records play an important role in
law enforcement, adjudication and correction. They also stigmatise the suspect/defendant
as unreliable, dishonest and perhaps dangerous. This stain on
reputation has a significant negative impact on employment prospects as well as
on the individual's future interactions with the criminal justice system. Arguably,
it is the purpose of a _conviction record_ to convey such a stigma for retributive,
expressive and deterrent purposes.[^/1]

But what about non-conviction records created for intelligence,
investigative or administrative purposes? This article shines a light on intelligence
databases and criminal investigative files that also stigmatise those who are
listed. It also focuses attention on arrest records which, though based only upon
a police officer's probable cause judgment, carry a stigma almost as potent as a
conviction record.

# INTELLIGENCE AND INVESTIGATIVE DATABASES

While law enforcement agencies have long maintained intelligence files on
criminal suspects who have not and may never be arrested, huge databases now
contain names and other identifying information of people suspected of having
committed or likely to commit crimes. The inclusion of an individual's name in
these databases is not subject even to the probable cause requirement that governs
arrests. Names are added without any review by a judge or magistrate. In other
words, the police department, perhaps a single officer, may create an indelible
criminal or quasi-criminal record that could last a lifetime. In our computer-dominated
age, the number and types of criminal and quasi-criminal databases
proliferate.


[^/1]: See, J.B. Jacobs, _The Community's Role in Defining the Aims of the Criminal Law_, in, IN THE
NAME OF JUSTICE 119--129 (T. Lynch ed., 2009).

In 1967, the Federal Bureau of Investigation \[hereinafter "FBI"\] established
the National Criminal Information Centre \[hereinafter "NCIC"\] with five 'files'
(databases) covering convicted persons, wanted persons and suspicious persons.[^/2]
By 2007, the NCIC contained 18 databases; several of them not dependent upon a
conviction or even an arrest. Yet, the repercussions for an individual of being
listed in one of these quasi-criminal or non-criminal databases may be the same
or similar as being listed in a database of convicted offenders.

# GANGS & TERRORISTS

Gang databases have proliferated at the local and state level. In some
communities a significant percentage of minority male youth are labelled as gang
members in databases that can be accessed by all law enforcement officers in
that community and, increasingly, state-wide. Likewise, many state and local
law enforcement agencies have created electronic databases on organised crime
members and associates, gangs, suspected gang members, and others.

In the 1990s the U.S. Department of Justice recognised violent gangs as a
major crime threat and later as a national security problem.[^/3] In 1995, the FBI
added a Violent Gang File to the NCIC with the three fold purpose of: (1) alerting
law enforcement officers to the potential danger posed by violent gang members;
(2) promoting the inter-agency exchange of information about these organisations;
(3) identifying a point of contact for agencies seeking information about the groups
or individuals. Two FBI agents explained at a Congressional hearing that:

>\[The Violent Gang File\] acts as a pointer system, identifying known
members of violent gangs and terrorist organisations and facilitating
the exchange of information. By alerting law enforcement officers to
potentially dangerous subjects, the VGF enhances their safety. In
short, the VGTOF provides every U.S. law enforcement agency access
to valuable information on a growing crime problem that threatens
the safety of officers and citizens in an increasing number of
communities.[^/4]


[^/2]: _See_, NCIC 2000: NATIONAL CRIME INFORMATION CENTRE: 30 YEARS ON THE BEAT, http://
permanent.access.gpo.gov/1ps3213/ncic; FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, CJIS DIVISION,
NATIONAI. CRIME INFORMATION CENTRE (NCIC), http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/doj/fbi/is/ncic.htm. _See also_, 28 CFR sec. 20.32 (offences to be included in the III). The NCIC
serves criminal justice agencies in all fifty states, the District of Columbia, the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, and Canada, as
well as federal agencies with law enforcement missions.


[^/3]: For a recent statement, see, CONGRESSIONAL TESTIMONY OF FBI DIRECTOR ROBERT MUELLER
BEFORE THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE, JULY 26, 2007, [http://www.fbi.gov/congress/congress07/mueller072607.htm](https://web.archive.org/web/20100409235909/http://www.fbi.gov/congress/congress07/mueller072607.htm).


The Violent Gang and Terrorist Organisations File \[hereinafter "VGTOF"\]
is comprised of two sub-databases, one on violent groups and the other on
members/associates of these groups. Neither a criminal conviction nor an arrest
is a prerequisite to being entered into the members/associates sub-database. The
FBI instructs participating state and local law enforcement agencies that:

>when entering a record for an individual into the VGTOF, agencies
>must ensure that, at the time of arrest or incarcération, the subject
>either admits membership in the gang or meets any two of the
>following criteria:
>
>1. Has been identified by an individual of proven reliability as a
> group member\[;\]
>2. Has been identified by an individual of unknown reliability as a
> group member and that information has been corroborated in
> significant respects\[;\]
>3. Has been observed by members of the entering agency to frequent
> a known group's area, associate with known group members,
> and/or affect the group's style of dress, tattoos, hand signals, or
> symbols\[;\]
>4. Has been arrested on more than one occasion with known group
> members for offences consistent with group activity\[; or\]
>5. Has admitted membership in the identified group at any time
> other than arrest or incarceration.[^/5]

Suppose a police officer stops X for a traffic violation, initiates an NCIC
background check and receives information that X is a member of a violent street
gang. Police officer may decide to arrest X and conduct a thorough vehicle search
rather than issue a summons. If drugs or other contraband is found, the 'case'
may be turned over to a gang task force. X will likely be charged as severely as
possible. While a private employer to whom X has applied for a job cannot directly
access the VGTOF, he may know a friendly police officer (or one who takes bribes)
who can access the database and pass along the information.[^/6] The negative
consequences of being listed in the VGTOF might be as significant as the
consequences of an arrest or even conviction.


[^/4]: P.F. EPISCOPO and D.L. MOOR, THE VIOLENT GANG AND TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS File, (1996),
[http://www.fbi.gov/publications/leb/1996/oct965.txt](https://web.archive.org/web/20090417183550/http://www.fbi.gov/publications/leb/1996/oct965.txt).


[^/5]: P.A. LAUTENSCHLAGER, ATT'Y GEN., Wis. Dept of Just., TIME SYSTEM MANUAL 285--86, available
at [http://www.doj.state.wi.us/dles/cibmanuals/files/TIME/PDF/Time.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20120523225056/http://www.doj.state.wi.us/dles/cibmanuals/files/TIME/PDF/Time.pdf). _See also_,
MEMORANDUM FROM RICHARD A. WELDON, FBI/CJIS GLOBAL INITIATIVES UNIT ON VIOLENT
GANG AND TERRORIST ORGANIZATION FILE ENTRY CRITERIA CODE (ECR) CHANGE,
http://www.acjic.alabama.gov/documents/violent_gang.pdf (describing VGTOF
codes pertaining to gang characteristics).

After the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks against the World Trade Centre
and the Pentagon, the U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Department of
Homeland Security added suspected terrorists to this file. They also added a
fourth rationale for the creation of the database - "_enhancing national security by
including the names and identifiers of known or suspected domestic and international terrorism
suspects in the VGTOF, thereby enlisting the aid of local and state law enforcement agencies in
the federal fight against terrorism._"[^/7]

When an individual is identified by the VGTOF as a known or suspected
terrorist, the Terrorist Screening Centre consolidates this information with other
databases into a terrorist watch list.[^/8] As of 2007, the Terrorist Screening Centre's
watch list contained 720,000 names.[^/9] Law enforcement officers are able to access this
information through routine background checks and are instructed to contact the
Terrorist Screening Centre when they encounter an individual who is on this watch
list.[^/10] At a minimum, local police and prosecutors are likely to exercise their discretion
to arrest and charge an individual whose name appears on this watch list.

Additionally, those added to the Terrorist Screening Centre's watch list face
substantial barriers to travel. Those not officially on the 'No Fly List' still encounter
extensive, humiliating searches or interrogation at the airport.[^/11] This is
particularly problematic due to improper control and maintenance of this
database. A 2009 Inspector General report showed that "_many of the nominations
submitted directly to the National Counterterrorism Centre by the Criminal Justice Information
Services were processed with little or no information explaining why the subject may have a
nexus to terrorism_".[^/12] Although the FBI had created criteria and standards for
information entered into this database, the report found that many entries were
inaccurate or incomplete and that the FBI had regularly failed to update or remove
information when necessary.[^/13] While 81,793 people have requested to be removed
from this watch list over the past three years, 25,000 petitions are still pending.[^/14]
Furthermore, the FBI has been slow in removing suspects who have been cleared.
One individual remained on the watch list for 5 years after his case was
favourably resolved.[^/15]

[^/6]: C.M. Katz, ISSUES IN THE PRODUCTION AND DISSEMINATION OF GANG STATISTICS: AN ETHNOGRAPHIC
STUDY OF A LARGE MIDWESTERN POLICE GANG UNIT 485,508--509 (2003) (police officers may
notify school officials or potential employers of an alleged gang member's status).


[^/7]: J.B. Jacobs & T. Crepet, _The Expanding Scope, Use, and Availability of Criminal Records_, 11 N.Y.U.J. LEG. PUB. POL'Y 177, 193 (2007).


[^/8]: _Ibid_., at 194--95.


[^/9]: E. Nakashima, _Terrorism Watch List Is Faulted For Errors_, Wasu. Post, Sept. 7, 2007, at
A12.


[^/10]: J. Jacobs & T. Crepet, _supra_. n.7, at 194--5.


[^/11]: One Canadian man who shares the same name as one on the list was interrogated
for six hours on a layover in Miami. He subsequently changed his name and
thereby avoided further airport interrogations. L. Alvarez, _Meet Mikey, 8: U.S. Has
Him on Watch List_, N. Y. TIMES January 13, 2009.


# IMMIGRATION VIOLATORS FILE

The NCIC's Immigration Violator File represented a major expansion of the
federal criminal record system because it brought violators of administrative
regulations into the NCIC.[^/16] The Immigration Violator File includes names and/or
fingerprints of 1) persons previously convicted of a felony and deported; 2)
persons resident in the U.S. who are subject to final deportation, exclusion or a
removal order; 3) persons with outstanding administrative warrants for failure
to comply with the national security registration requirements.[^/17]

[^/12]: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, AUDIE DIVISION, THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION'S TERRORIST WATCHLIST NOMINATION PRACTICES, v (May 2009),
[http://www.justice.gov/oig/reports/FBI/a0925/final.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20210714144310/https://oig.justice.gov/reports/FBI/a0925/final.pdf).

[^/13]: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, AUDIT DIVISION, THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION'S TERRORIST WATCHLIST NOMINATION PRACTICES, 2 (May 2009),
[http://www.justice.gov/oig/reports/FBI/a0925/final.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20210714144310/https://oig.justice.gov/reports/FBI/a0925/final.pdf).

[^/14]: L. Alvarez, Meet Mikey, 8: _U.S. Has Him on Watch List_, N. Y. TIMES January 13, 2009.
One 8 year old boy was repeatedly interrogated at airports because he had the
same name as someone on the watch list. His family's strenuous efforts to rectify
the situation were, at least until recently, unsuccessful.

[^/15]: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL, AUDIT DIVISION, THE FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION'S TERRORIST WATCHLEST NOMINATION PRACTICES VI (May 2009), _available
at_, [http://www.justice.gov/oig/reports/FBI/a0925/final.pdf](https://web.archive.org/web/20210714144310/https://oig.justice.gov/reports/FBI/a0925/final.pdf).

[^/16]: According to plaintiffs' brief in _National Council of La Raza v. Gonzales_:

    ... the NCIC statute ... limits the FBI's power to collect and exchange criminal justice
    information to narrowly delineated categories. The civil immigration records and
    administrative warrants at issue in this case are not "criminal records" under the
    statute. In addition, the individuals who are the subjects of those records have not
    been charged or convicted criminally, and are nor subject to criminal warrants.
    These individuals are not "criminals" merely because the defendants so label them.
    Brief for Petitioner--Plaintiff at 2, _Nat'l Council of La Raza v. Gonzales_, 468 F. Supp 2d
    429 (United States District Court, E.D. New York 2007).
    
    _See also_, CONGRESSIONAL TESTIMONY OF MICHAEL D. KILPATRICK, ASSISTANT DIRECTOR IN CHARGE,
    CRIMINAL JUSTICE INFORMATION SERVICES DIVISION, FBI, BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON
    IMMIGRATION, BORDER SECURITY AND CITIZENSHIP, COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY, U.S. SENATE,
    NOVEMBER 13, 2003, [http://www.fbi.gov/congress/congress03/ncic111303.htm](https://web.archive.org/web/20090311145015/http://www.fbi.gov/congress/congress03/ncic111303.htm).

[^/17]: NCIC 2000 OPERATING MANUAL, IMMIGRATION VIOLATOR FILE,
https://olets-info.olets.state.ok.us/cjismanuals/pdf/Immigration_violator.htm.

The consequence of including the Immigration Violators File in the NCIC is
to enlist state and local law enforcement personnel in enforcing the federal
immigration laws. If a police officer anywhere in the U.S. stops a driver for a
traffic violation and initiates a computer search of the NCIC database, the officer
may be told via an electronic transmission that the U.S. Department of
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) has issued an _administrative warrant_
for the individual's detention.[^/18] If so, the police officer is instructed to contact the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) Law Enforcement Support Center
for confirmation. The officer is usually told to arrest or detain the person until
DHS can take custody of him/her.[^/19]

There is growing use of criminal and immigration records as a tool for
enforcing the U.S immigration laws. Visa applicants with criminal records in
their home countries are excluded from entering the U.S.; those foreigners in the
U.S. who have violated the terms of their visas or other immigration laws are
deported or sent home "voluntarily".

Though many state and local police officials are opposed to being drawn
into enforcing the federal immigration laws, some police departments are keen to
do so.[^/20] Moreover, state-level social services agencies want immigration status
information in order to make decisions on eligibility for various governmental
social welfare programmes, like public housing, food stamps and student loans.
Public and private employers have various reasons for desiring access to the
Immigration Violators File:

1) Because they do not want to violate federal law;
2) Because they want to hire individuals who have a secure place in the society;
3) Because they want to hire undocumented aliens so as to avoid employment laws.

The Government is steadily expanding the number of private individuals and
businesses who have access to this database.

[^/18]: In _National Council of La Raza v. Gonzales_, the federal court rejected, for lack of
standing, a challenge to including the names of absconders and NSEERS violators
in the NCIC. _National Council of La Raza v. Gonzales_, 468 F. Supp 2d 429 (United
States District Court, E.D. New York 2007). (plaintiffs lack standing because injury
remains speculative).


[^/19]: _National Council of La Raza v. Gonzales_, 468 F. Supp 2d 429, 434 (United States
District Court, E.D. New York 2007).


[^/20]: _See_, A. SHAHANI AND J. GREENE, LOCAL DEMOCRACY ON ICE: WHY STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
HAVE NO BUSINESS IN FEDERAL IMMIGRATION LAW ENFORCEMENT (2009). The authors point out
that the police department of Hoover, Alabama was aggressively arresting illegal
aliens, some of whom were gang members, in order to qualify for federal grant
money.

# CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION DATABASES

Computer technology has led to the creation of criminal investigation
databases to which numerous investigators can contribute and obtain
information about the progress of an investigation. This can be of considerable
importance in a major investigation involving investigators from diverse agencies
at the federal, state, and local level. However, it also creates the risk of investigative
information being leaked to the media and the public. This is exactly what
happened in the FBI's massive Amerithrax investigation which the FBI initiated
in 2001 following the mailing of several anthrax-laced letters which resulted in
five deaths, nineteen injuries and mass anxiety throughout the U.S.[^/21]

The Automated Case Support System \[hereinafter "ACS"\], the FBI's database
that stored information on the investigation, was not password protected and
could be accessed by thousands of law enforcement personnel.[^/22] Inevitably the
name of an investigative target was leaked to the media. Ultimately, that individual
was cleared of any connection to the anthrax-laced letters, but his personal and
professional life was shattered. He successfully sued the government for having
violated the Privacy Act.[^/23] The case demonstrates the enormous negative
consequences that can result from inclusion in an investigative database.[^/24]

# ARREST RECORDS

At first blush it seems inconceivable that every police officer has the _de facto_
power to impose a lifetime stigma on any individual.[^/25] After all, an arrest means
nothing more than that, at a particular point in time, a police officer thought,
rightly or wrongly, that there was probable cause to believe that a particular
person committed a particular offence.[^/26] The officer might have been completely
mistaken or might even have been acting in bad faith, perhaps on account of a
grudge or on account of the arrestee's race, religion, politics or organisational
affiliation. That is why when an arrest is made without a warrant, the law requires
a judicial finding of probable cause for the arrest.

[^/21]: E. Murphy & D. Sklansky, Science, _Suspects, and Systems: Lessons from the Anthrax
Investigation, Issues in Legal Scholarship_ 8(2) New DIR. FOR THE DEP'T JUST. (2009).

[^/22]: J.B. Jacobs & D. Curtin, _Remedying Defamation by Law Enforcement: Fall Out From the
Wen Ho Lee, Steven Hatfill and Brandon Mayfield Settlements_, 46(2) Crim. L. Bull. 17,
n. 65 (2010)

[^/23]: _Id_.

[^/24]: See, UNOFFICIAL DOCKET, ENTRY FOR MAY 31, 2006
[http://www.anthraxinvestigation.com/Docket.html#Disclaimers](https://web.archive.org/web/20080702214502/http://www.anthraxinvestigation.com/Docket.html#Disclaimers).

[^/25]: See, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, PRIVACY, TECHNOLOGY AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE
INFORMATION: PUBLIC ATTITUDES TOWARD THE USE OF CRIMINAL HISTORY INFORMATION,
http://www.obblaw.com/privacytf-survey.pdf at 5 (July 2001) (Regarding conviction
records) "47% \[of respondents\] prefer what was labeled as a 'partially open system'
where only conviction records are available to everyone;" for arrest records,
"approximately 3 out of 10 adults would bar any access to arrest-only records to
any employer or government licensing agency. About one half would allow limited
access based on the sensitivity of the position, while only 15% would grant all
employers or government licensing agencies access to arrest-only records."

However, a judge's probable cause finding establishes nothing more than
probable cause to believe that the suspect committed an offence. To draw an inference
of guilt from a cursory and _ex parte_ finding of probable cause seems like a blatant
violation of the presumption of innocence.[^/27] Nevertheless, the criminal justice
system maintains arrest records permanently even when the arrest does not result
in a conviction.[^/28] Moreover, public or private discrimination based upon recorded
arrests is mostly permissible.[^/29] To understand how this could be true, we need to
understand why and how arrest records are created, maintained and accessed.

# THE POLICE USE OF ARREST RECORDS

The U.S. database of individual criminal history records, called 'rap sheets'
(record of arrest and prosecution), is designed and operated for law enforcement
purposes.[^/30] Rap sheets are based upon arrests. They should provide a complete
chronological record of an individual's arrests and subsequent criminal justice
system actions on those arrests, including pre-trial release or detention,
indictment, plea, trial, sentence and parole.[^/31] The arrest is formally recorded at
'booking', the processing procedure at the police station or central booking facility
to which the police deliver a suspect whom they have taken into custody.[^/32] During
the booking procedure, the details of the arrest as well as the arrestee's identity
information (name, photo, fingerprints) will be entered into a computer
information system, thereby creating a rap sheet. Each state has a criminal records
repository which stores that state's rap sheets. The FBI's Interstate Identification
Index (III system) coordinates all 50 states' repositories.[^/33]

[^/26]: _See generally_, W.R.LAFAYE, ARREST: THE DECISION TO TAKE A SUSPECT INTO CUSTODY (1964).

[^/27]: I say "seems like" because the Supreme Court has held that the presumption of
innocence is only an evidentiary standard which applies at a criminal trial. The
presumption of innocence emphasizes that the prosecutor must prove every
offence element beyond a reasonable doubt. See, _Bell v. Wolfish_, 441 U.S. 520 (U.S.
Sup. Ct. 1979) \[hereinafter "_Bell v. Wolfish_"\].

[^/28]: _See_, e.g., LEGAL ACTION CTR., How To GET AND CLEAN UP YOUR NEW YORK STATE RAP SHEET 6
(7th ed. 2007), _available at_, http://www.hirenetwork.org/pdfs/NYS_Rap_Sheet_Final.pdf. ("If you have ever been arrested for a fingerprintable
offense in New York State, even if you were never found guilty of the charges, you
have an arrest record on permanent file at DCJS. These records --- also called "rap
sheets" --- cannot be destroyed or expunged.")

[^/29]: _See_, J. Henry & J.B. Jacobs, _Ban the Box to Promote Ex-Offender Employment_, 6 Crim. &
PUB. POL'Y 755, 756 (2007).

[^/30]: For a discussion of the creation and use of rap sheets, _see_, J.B. Jacobs & T. Crepet,
_The Expanding Scope, Use, and Availability of Criminal Records_, 11 N.Y. U. J. LEG. PUB.
POL'Y 177, 180--82 (2007).

When a police officer stops or just suspects someone of involvement in a
crime, she can run a background check on the individual. If the suspect has ever
been booked, anywhere in the U.S., that criminal record information along with
accompanying identification data (name, photo, fingerprints) will be accessible
electronically. When a suspect is booked, the police will run a fingerprint search
that will reveal prior arrests, even if those arrests were recorded under an alias.
Quite recently, some police departments have been experimenting with devices
that can take and transmit fingerprints from the field.[^/34]

All U.S. states record felonies and serious misdemeanours in their criminal
record system. However, states differ somewhat with respect to which
misdemeanours are considered serious enough to be included on rap sheets. Up
until recently the FBI did not accept arrest information for "non-serious crimes",
but in 2006, prompted by enhanced computer capacity, the FBI proposed changing
its policy so that states could transmit to the FBI's Criminal Identification Division
arrest information for non-serious crimes as well.[^/35] States can decide for
themselves whether to comply. For example, Florida and Texas have begun adding
to their rap sheet databases the names and fingerprints of individuals who are
stopped, cited and released (without being booked in the police precinct).[^/36] Thus,
more people have a permanent arrest record. It is likely that more than one-fourth
of U.S. adults will have an arrest record for a substantial part of their
adult life.[^/37]


[^/31]: In reality, rap sheets often lack much post-arrest information. While typically the
police reliably transmit arrest and arrestee information to the state repositories,
prosecutors and courts are less reliable. An end user who wants to find out a
particular arrest may have to contact the relevant police, prosecutor, or court.

[^/32]: _See_, J.B. Jacobs, _Mass Incarceration and the Proliferation of Criminal Records_, 3 ST. THOMAS
L. R. 387, 392--93 (2006).

[^/33]: For an explanation of the FBI's III system, _see_, _Ibid_., at 394--95.

[^/34]: _See_, ROADSIDE FINGERPRINTING IN TEXAS, TEXAS CRIMINAL DEFENCE LAWYER, _available at_ http://www.mytexasdefenselawyer.com/2009/02/24/roadside-figerprints-texas/ (2009);
PRESS RELEASE 2008: FLORIDA DEPARTMENT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT (FDLE) & COLLER COUNTY-RAPID-ID,
DATA WORKS PLUS, _available at_ http://www.dataworksplus.com/press.htm.
(DataWorks Plus has been working with the Florida Department of Law Enforcement
(FDLE) to pilot the new FALCON RAPID-ID system using DataWorks Plus' SAFID
... The hand held scanners weigh only 3 ounces and can easily fit in an officer's
pocket or belt. It includes Bluetooth communication to wirelessly transfer scanned
fingerprints to a PDA, laptop, or cellular phone. ... Within one minute, DataWorks
Plus' RAPID-ID software will display any warrants or criminal history for an
individual).



To whom and for what is an arrest record relevant? Most importantly, the
police consider an arrest to be relevant to their work. At a later date a previous
arrest might provide a lead to solving a current case. The police may find
fingerprints at a crime scene and match them to those of a person previously
arrested and fingerprinted anywhere in the U.S. Moreover, if there is a spate of
burglaries in a particular neighbourhood, the police will look carefully at
individuals who, in the recent past, have been arrested for burglary in that
neighbourhood, whether or not they were convicted.[^/38] Likewise, suppose that
Ms. Smith has been murdered. It certainly makes sense to investigate Mr. Jones
who was previously arrested for stalking her, whether or not his previous arrest
resulted in a conviction. Previous arrests, perhaps with some additional evidence,
may give the police probable cause to obtain a search warrant or to arrest a
suspect.[^/39] To take another example, suppose the police arrest Mr. White for cyber-stalking
and find that he was twice previously arrested for the same crime, but
that charges were dropped because victims would not cooperate. Those previous
arrests should persuade police officers and prosecutors to make a strong effort to
press this current case to a successful conclusion.


[^/35]: 71 CFR 171 (September 5, 2006); _see_, 28 CFR Part 20; _see also_, J. Jacobs & T. Crepet,
_supra_. n. 30, at 187--88 (discussing the inclusion of non-serious crimes in the FBI's
criminal record database).

[^/36]: _See_, J. Henry & J. Jacobs, _Ban the Box to Promote Ex-Offender Employment_, 6 CRIM. &
PUB. POL'Y 755, 756 (2007).

[^/37]: N. Miller, _A Study of the Number of Persons with Records of Arrest or Conviction in the
Labour Force_, U.S. Dept. of Labour Technical Analysis Paper # 63 (1979).

[^/38]: _See_, _Menard v. Saxbe_, 498 F.2d 1017, 1024 (U.S. Ct. App., District of Columbia Cir. 1974)
(quoting _Davidson v. Dill_, 503 P.2d 157, 159 (Sup. Ct. Colorado 1972)) ("_It is common
knowledge that a man with an arrest record is much more apt to be subject to police scrutiny ---
the first to be questioned and the last to be eliminated as a suspect in any investigation._").

[^/39]: G.T. Lowenthal, _The Disclosure of Arrest Records to the Public Under the Uniform Criminal
History Records Act_, 28 JURIMETRICS 9, 12 (1987).

# PROSECUTORIAL AND JUDICIAL USE OF RECORDED ARRESTS

Rap sheets are routinely and extensively used by prosecutors, judges,
probation officers and prison personnel. Prosecutors enjoy practically unfettered
discretion in deciding what charges to bring and what plea bargains to strike.[^/40]
They are likely to treat a suspect or defendant with a record of prior arrests more
severely; they are likely to be comparatively lenient with suspects and defendants
who have no previous arrests.[^/41] Such discrimination would probably strike us
as unfair if the previous arrest(s) was based on police error or on a personal
vendetta against an innocent person. However, most of us would feel differently
if the previous arrest(s) did not result in a conviction for a reason unrelated to
guilt or innocence (e.s., witness intimidation!).

Judges routinely take previous arrests into account in deciding whether to
release a defendant pre-trial.[^/42] Many judges believe that, all things being equal, a
defendant with several previous arrests for serious crimes poses a greater threat
to the community and/or a greater risk of flight than a defendant who had never
been previously arrested. If the judge orders pre-trial release of a person with an
arrest record, she might impose certain conditions like drug testing or electronic
monitoring which she would not impose if the person had no previous arrests. If
the judge decides to set bail, she might decide that, in light of the defendant's
previous arrest history, a higher bond is required to assure the defendant's
attendance at future court dates.


[^/40]: Prosecutors have enormous discretion over charging. _See_, M. MILLER & R.F. WRIGHT,
CRIMINAL PROCEDURES: PROSECUTION AND ADJUDICATION 134 (3rd ed., 2007)
("Prosecutors ... have the most to say about whether to file charges against a
suspect and which charges to select. Granted, they react to an initial charge
proposed by the police, ... \[b\]ut in the end, the prosecutor can overrule police
charging decisions without interference, and judges and grand juries only rarely
refuse to go forward with the prosecutor's charging decisions.").

[^/41]: _E.g._, The Diversionary Program Rules of the Office of the District Attorney, Orleans
Parish, Louisiana state; that "The program is offered to persons who are first time
arrestees of state misdemeanor or felony statutes (no prior convictions and no
significant arrest history including any acts of violence; have not been arrested
for a violent crime, drug distribution, illegal carrying or use of a weapon, or heroin
possession.") See, M. MILLER & R.F. WRIGHT, CRIMINAL PROCEDURES: PROSECUTION AND
ADJUDICATION 160 (3^rd^ edn., 2007).

[^/42]: Twenty-four states either require or permit criminal records to be considered in
bail decisions, and thirty-two states have statutes authorizing consideration of
criminal histories in corrections classifications. B. Harrison, _State Criminal Records_,
27 NAT'L CONF. OF ST. LEGIS.: St. LEGIS RPT.1,2 (2002). _See also_, _Russell v. U.S._, 402 F.2d 185
(U.S. Ct. App., District of Columbia Cir. 1968) (A judge may consider arrest record
in deciding whether to grant release pending appeal.).


Judges can also consider previous arrests in their sentencing decisions.[^/43]
Historically, under indeterminate sentencing regimes, judges could rely on any
and all information in sentencing.[^/44] (Interestingly, however, no federal or state
sentencing guidelines assign criminal history score points to arrests.[^/45]) The judge
might believe that a convicted defendant with a history of previous arrests is a
recidivist who needs to be incapacitated. The U.S. Supreme Court has held that
there is no constitutional impediment to enhancing a sentence on account of
previous arrests.[^/46] Prison officials may use a history of previous arrests to assign
the convicted defendant to a particular prison and/or to a particular prison
program or housing unit. Parole officials might take prior arrests into account in
assessing the parole applicant's risk of future criminal conduct.

# THE PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE

It is popularly but incorrectly believed that the presumption of innocence
protects the individual against detrimental governmental actions until after a
verdict or plea of guilty. The U.S. Supreme Court explained in _Bell v. Wolfish_ that
the presumption of innocence is merely an evidentiary standard that applies to
the trier of fact at a criminal trial.[^/47] It does not prevent the government from
detaining or freezing an accused defendant's assets before trial. The Court opined
that pre-trial detention in jail is "_regulatory_", not "_punitive_", because the state's intent
is not to punish but to prevent the defendant from becoming a fugitive.[^/48] Likewise,
recording arrest information is not meant to inflict punishment, but to increase the
likelihood of solving crimes and of efficiently processing criminal cases.


[^/43]: The Supreme Court has held that it is not unconstitutional for a sentencing judge
to consider prior arrests and even prior acquittals as negative factors. _U.S. v.
Witte_, 515 U.S. 389 (U.S. Sup. Ct. 1995); _U.S. v. Watts_, 519 U.S. 148 (U.S. Sup. Ct. 1997).
_See also_, _U.S. v. Cafarelli_, 401 F.2d 512 (U.S. Ct. App. 2d Cir. 1966) (for sentencing
purposes, trial judge may consider arrests that did not lead to conviction).

[^/44]: _Williams v. New York_, 337 U.S. 241 (U.S. Sup. Ct. 1949).

[^/45]: _See_, e.g., United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual, §41.3 (a)(1)
(allowing a sentence to be increased "\[i\]f reliable information indicates that the
defendant's criminal history category substantially under-represents the
seriousness of the defendant's criminal history or the likelihood that the defendant
will commit other crime"), 4A1.3 (a)(2) (considering factors such as prior sentences,
"\[p\]rior similar misconduct established by a civil adjudication or by a failure to
comply with an administrative order," or similar conduct as an adult that did not
result in a conviction). The guidelines, however, do note that "\[a\] prior arrest
record itself shall not be considered for purposes of an upward departure under
this policy statement." _Id_. at §4A1.3(a)(3).

[^/46]: _U.S. v. Witte_, 515 U.S. 389 (U.S. Sup. Ct. 1995).

[^/47]: _Bell v. Wolfish_, 441 U.S. 520 (U.S. Sup. Ct. 1979).

[^/48]: _Bell v. Wolfish_, 441 U.S. 520, 537 (U.S. Sup. Ct. 1979).

# EMPLOYERS USE OF ARRESTS

Most states withhold from non-criminal justice organisations and
individuals information on arrests that have been pending for more than one
year.[^/49] When the FBI conducts nationwide criminal background searches on behalf
of some non-criminal justice entities, it does not provide information on arrests
that have been pending for more than a year.[^/50] This reflects a presumption that
after a year a pending arrest is not likely to result in a conviction.

While most public employers and licensing boards do not ask applicants to
divulge information about prior arrests that have not resulted in convictions,
many private employers do ask; increasingly, they can independently obtain
arrest information from private information vendors.[^/51] The federal Fair Credit
Reporting Act permits credit reporting agencies to include in their reports to
clients information about an individual's arrests over the preceding seven years.[^/52]
Discovery of an arrest record, even without a subsequent conviction, may cause
an employer not to offer employment to the job applicant. Skolnick's and
Schwartz's famous field study in the late 1960s found that an arrest for assault
followed by an acquittal had as much negative effect on obtaining employment
as an assault conviction.[^/53]


[^/49]: e.g., CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD CHECKS FOR NON-CRIMINAL JUSTICE PURPOSES: A FACT SHEET
PREPARED BY THE KANSAS BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION, _available at_,
http://64.233.167.104/search?q=cache:GYKVi4sJu6cJ:www.kshousingcorp.org/display/Section8/Program%2520Requirments/KB1%2520Criminal%2520Records%2520Check%2520Fact%2520Sheet.pdf+FBI+regulations+arrests+non+criminal+justice+purposes&hl=en&ct=clnk&cd=3&gl=us.

[^/50]: 28 CFR Part 20

[^/51]: _See_, NAT'L CONSORTIUM FOR JUSTICE INFORMATION AND STATISTICS, NAT'L. TASK FORCE ON THE
CRIMINAL BACKGROUNDING OF AMERICA 7 (2005), _available at_

    http://www.search.org/files/pdf/ReportofNTFCBA.pdf (Hereinafter "Report of
    NTFCBA") (discussing the multitude of state laws allowing private information
    vendors to access state databases). When the FBI conducts nationwide criminal
    background searches on behalf of some non-criminal justice entities, it does not
    provide information on arrests that have been pending for more than a year. _See_,
    _supra_. n. 45. The FBI carries out almost as many criminal background checks for
    non-criminal justice purposes as for criminal justice purposes. Private information
    vendors provide this information almost exclusively to private sector clients. _See_,
    Report of NTFCBA.

[^/52]: Fair Credit Reporting Act, 15 U.S.C. §1681 _et. seq_.

[^/53]: R. Schwartz & J. Skolnick, _Two Studies of Legal Stigma_, 10 SOC. PROB. 133--142 (1963); _See also_, J. Grogger, _The Effects of Arrest on the Employment and Earnings of Young Men_,
110(1) Q.J. ECO.51--71 (1995); D. PAGER, MARKED; RACE, CRIME AND FINDING WORK IN AN ERA
OF MASS INCARCERATION (2007).

# WHY ARRESTS DO NOT LEAD TO CONVICTIONS

Before jumping to the conclusion that arrests that do not result in convictions
(within a certain period of time, like a year) should be purged from the rap sheet,
we need to consider why arrests do not result in convictions. One obvious reason
is that the case is still pending; there may eventually be a conviction. Sometimes
cases can take many months to reach final judgment. The processing of the case
may be interrupted and delayed because the defendant is not available (sick, fled
the jurisdiction, etc.). The defendant may have requested a trial postponement to
accommodate his defence lawyer's schedule or to obtain more forensic testing.
Obviously, while the case is pending, there has to be a record of it. Because court
records are open to the public and the media,[^/54] a pending criminal case is a matter
of public record. Consequently, it would be very difficult, perhaps legally and
logistically impossible, to keep the fact of an arrest confidential or secret.

The strongest case for destroying an arrest record or keeping it confidential
arises when police supervisors or prosecutors concluded no crime was committed
or that, although there was a crime, the arrestee had nothing to do with it. An
arrest record in such situations could not provide information to police or other
criminal justice system decision makers that would be relevant to future
investigations (although anyone's fingerprints _might_ some day prove useful). While,
in such circumstances, some states require that the arrest record be 'sealed,' most
states do not.[^/55] Moreover, in the computer age, where information is diffused so
rapidly, sealing can hardly be counted on to be effective.

If the defendant is acquitted of all charges, the case for purging the recorded
arrest, indictment, and verdict is stronger. But it is important to remember that
a not guilty verdict means that the prosecution has not carried its burden of
proving every material element of the offence beyond a reasonable doubt. It does
not mean that the arresting officer lacked probable cause to make the arrest or
that the grand jury lacked probable cause to issue an indictment. (One need only
recall the not guilty verdict in the O.J. Simpson double murder case.[^/56]) The arrest
and indictment are historical _facts_, just like the acquittal. They are a matter of
public record unless somehow erased from the public record.


[^/54]: C.M. Morrison, _Privacy, Accountability, and the Cooperating Defendant: Towards a New
Role for Internet Access to Court Records_, 62 VAND. L. R.921, 937--941 (2009).

[^/55]: Compare New York State Criminal Procedure Law (2009) §160.50 (Order Upon
Termination of Criminal Action in Favor of the Accused) _with_ S.D. Stuckey, _Collateral
Effects of Arrests in Minnesota_, 5 U. ST. THOMAS L.J. 335, 342 (2008) ("Arrest records are
publicly available until individuals take the proper steps to seal their records. ...
Few individuals are able to take the proper steps to seal their records, however,
because these options are not well known and may be cost-prohibitive.")

[^/56]: _See_, V. BUGLIOSI, OUTRAGE THE FIVE REASONS WHY O.J. SIMPSON GOT AWAY WITH MURDER (1996).

Other reasons why arrests do not lead to convictions present a much weaker
case for purging the arrest from the rap sheet and/or withholding the information
from criminal justice and non-criminal justice users. The most prevalent reason
for an arrest not ripening into a conviction is lack of victim or witness cooperation,
a reason that has nothing to do with the arrestee's actual innocence. The victim or
witness may have died or become too ill to testify or have moved away. Some
victims and witnesses do not want to take time off from work. Some have a
criminal record themselves and fear police and prosecutorial scrutiny. Others
have reasons for not wanting to cooperate with police and prosecutors. For
example, the victim may have a relationship with the defendant and 1) fear that
cooperating with the prosecutor would jeopardise the defendant's financial and
emotional support or 2) fear that cooperation would lead the defendant to retaliate.

An arrest may not result in conviction because of evidentiary and other
legal problems. For example, crucial evidence may not be admissible at trial because
of an unconstitutional search and seizure, identification procedure ("line-up") or
interrogation. The court may dismiss charges because the time limit for moving
the case forward (e.g., statutory speedy trial rules) has been exceeded. The judge
may have dismissed the charges because of prosecutorial misconduct before or
during trial. Despite the failure to convict, the police will regard the arrestee as
factually guilty and the arrest itself as an indicator of criminal propensity.

Another reason why an arrest might not result in a conviction is that the
police or prosecutors concluded that a non-criminal justice diversion program,
or just a warning, would produce a more desirable disposition. In such cases, the
police and prosecutors need to retain a record of the arrest/warning or arrest/diversion
so that if the same person is arrested in the future, she is not again
treated as a first offender eligible for lenient treatment.[^/57] In deciding whether and
how to charge a particular defendant, criminal justice decision-makers want to
know as much as possible about the suspect/defendant's criminal career. If arrest
records had to be purged after a decision not to charge, police and prosecutors
might be much less likely to exercise leniency in the first place.


[^/57]: For example, in England, the police can issue a "police caution" to an arrestee. If
a person accepts this "caution," the case is not forwarded to the Crown Prosecution
Service. However, the "caution" remains on the cautioned individual's record to
guide future decisions of police and prosecutors. See, M. MILLER & R.F. WRIGHT,
CRIMINAL PROCEDURES: PROSECUTION AND ADJUDICATION 134 (3^rd^ edn., 2007).


Many state legislatures, prosecutorial agencies and courts have developed
various pre-judgment diversion strategies that allow certain defendants to avoid
a conviction record. In New York State a disposition called "_adjournment in
contemplation of dismissal_" (or ACD) is frequently used.[^/58] It is a kind of pre-judgment
probation supervised by the prosecutor. If, within the one year "probationary
period," the defendant is arrested on new charges, the prosecutor will reactivate
the former case. However, if the defendant is not rearrested, his case will
automatically be dismissed and the arrest record sealed. If the police and
prosecutors do not have access to a record of the previous arrest (and the previous
adjournment in contemplation of dismissal disposition), the individual might be
offered another adjournment in contemplation of dismissal if he is arrested again.
In effect, he would perpetually qualify for first offender leniency.[^/59]

In many cases, the defendant is convicted (by trial verdict or guilty plea) of
an offence other than the most serious offence for which he was arrested. For
example, Alpha may have been arrested for rape and pled guilty to assault and
battery; or, at trial, he may have been acquitted of rape, but convicted of the lesser
offence. Should the arrest for rape be purged from his permanent rap sheet? If it is
not, the rap sheet's reader might infer that Alpha actually committed a rape.
However, if it is purged from the rap sheet, what should the rap sheet show as the
arrest offence? Even if the charge and arrest for rape is purged from the court's
docket, should it be purged from the rap sheet as well?

# WHAT'S TO BE DONE?

Were we to conclude that pre-conviction criminal records carry an unfair
stigma, what should be done? The next section considers several possibilities;
sealing arrest records; prohibiting non-criminal justice entities and individuals
from obtaining and/or using arrest information; and prohibiting employment
discrimination based on intelligence and arrest records.


[^/58]: New York Criminal Procedure Law (2009) §170.55. The granting of an adjournment in
contemplation of dismissal shall not be deemed to be a conviction or an admission
of guilt. No person shall suffer any disability or forfeiture as a result of such an order.
Upon the dismissal of the accusatory instrument pursuant to this section, the arrest
and prosecution shall be deemed a nullity and the defendant shall be restored, in
contemplation of law, to the status he occupied before his arrest and prosecution.

[^/59]: While, in New York state, the state-level individual criminal history record system
seems to regularly seal successfully completed ACDs, it is not always the case
that county-level criminal justice system agencies --- police, prosecutors, probation,
children's services --- seal the arrest information that exists in their independent
databases.

# SEALING ARREST RECORDS

Some states provide for expunging or sealing of records of arrests and charges
that did not result in convictions; some of these states permit individuals to deny
to a potential employer the existence of an expunged or sealed record.[^/60] For
example, New York State seeks to prevent arrests that result in an outcome
"_favourable to the accused_" from becoming permanent. When charges are dismissed
or when they result in an acquittal, arrest information should be 'sealed' and
fingerprints, photographs, and records should be destroyed or returned to the
defendant or his attorney.[^/61] (However, the arrest is not sealed or removed if the
arrestee was convicted of a lesser offence.) Once sealed, the record is only
available to a person who can persuade a judge that s/he has "good cause" to
see the record.[^/62]

In practice purging and sealing records works imperfectly, especially in
this age of high-powered computer technology. It is increasingly unlikely that an
arrest that has been sealed can truly be kept confidential. With some digging, an
even moderately motivated and competent investigator can obtain the arrest
information from the daily log ('police blotter') kept at the police station
(sometimes regularly published in the local newspaper) or from the court's docket
kept at the courthouse. Some private information vendors maintain their own
criminal record databases based on information obtained en masse from court
records; they provide this information to clients for a modest fee. The electronic
or print media may have reported the defendant's name and the charges against
him, especially if there was a trial. Of course, individual police officers are likely
to have 'filed' facts about the arrest and arrestee in their independent police
information system, in their own memo books or just in their memories.

Under current practice in most American jurisdictions, the arrest remains
on the rap sheet even if the case is dismissed by the prosecutor, dismissed by the
court, adjourned in contemplation of dismissal or resolved by a not guilty verdict.
The rap sheet is supposed to contain the notation that the case was dismissed or
was resolved by an acquittal or some other non-conviction resolution but, in
practice, dispositions often do not get reported to the criminal records repository
and are not recorded on the rap sheet.


[^/60]: D.A. Mukamal & P.N. Samuels, _Statutory Limitations on Civil Rights of People with
Criminal Records_, 30 FORDHAM URB. L.J. 1501, 1509 (2003).

[^/61]: New York Criminal Procedure Law (2009) §160.50 (providing that upon termination
of a case in a manner favourable to the defendant all photographs and fingerprints
taken of the defendant and other identifying information be destroyed or sealed).
However, in a 1991 case, the New York Court of Appeals decided that when police
violated this law and used information retained in a subsequent case, e.g. to
identify the defendant, that the defendant was not entitled to suppression of the
unlawfully retained material and the use thereof. _People v. Patterson_, 78 N.Y.2d 711 (Ct. App. New York 1991).

[^/62]: New York Criminal Procedure Law (2009) §160.50(1)(d).

# PROHIBIT NON-CRIMINAL JUSTICE ENTITIES FROM OBTAINING AND/OR USING ARREST INFORMATION

Another potential option is to restrict access to intelligence and arrest records
to law enforcement and criminal justice officials. This policy would alleviate
many of the concerns raised by the dissemination of arrest records to the general
public:

>Judges and lawyers ... should be better able than laypersons to
recognise the important distinctions between arrests and
convictions and to give appropriate weight to non-conviction
records when exercising discretion. In addition, the criminal process
includes procedural checks against the improper use of arrest
records. The presence of defence counsel and the availability of
appellate review lessen the risks of misinterpretation and misuse of
such records.[^/63]

However, this option is easier said than done because court dockets are
open for public inspection, and arrest information may be obtained while a case
is pending. In addition, pre-trial hearings are open to the public as well. Once
information gleaned from records and proceedings is injected into the public
domain, it is hardly possible later to restrict access to it. Even if access to arrest
information could initially be successfully limited to criminal justice system
personnel, there would remain the huge problem of preventing 'leaks' to the
media and the public.[^/64]


[^/63]: G.T. Lowenthal, _The Disclosure of Arrest Records to the Public Under the Uniform Criminal
History Records Act_, 28 JURIMETRICS 9,14 (1987).

[^/64]: _See_, J.B. Jacobs, _Mass Incarceration and the Proliferation of Criminal Records_, 3 ST. THOMAS
L. R. 387,411 (2006); J.B. Jacobs & D. Curtin, _Remedying Defamation by Law Enforcement:
Fall Out From the Wen Ho Lee, Steven Hatfill and Brandon Mayfield Settlements_,
CRIM. L. BULL. 17, n. 65 46(2) (2010). (discussing the leak of investigative info when
only law enforcement officials had access to the database where the investigative
information was stored).

# PROHIBITING EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION BASED ON INTELLIGENCE AND ARREST RECORD

Some states prohibit employers from asking or even considering arrest
information, but most do not.[^/65] For example, California prohibits public and
private employers from procuring by any means job seekers' arrest records and
also prohibits asking job seekers to disclose information regarding an arrest or
detention that did not result in a conviction or information about a referral to or
participation in a pre-trial diversion program.[^/66] An employer who violates this
prohibition is subject to a $500 fine. (However, this prohibition does not apply to
arrest information during the time that a prosecution is pending.)

_Gregory v. Litton System_ stands as the leading federal case on the use of previous
arrests to disqualify a job applicant.[^/67] The employer required all job applicants to
disclose previous arrests and then disqualified applicants with numerous arrests.
The federal district court held that the policy violated Title VII of the Civil Rights
Act[^/68] because, though neutral on its face, it disproportionately impacted job
opportunities for African--Americans who are disproportionately likely to be
arrested.

In 1990, the Federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC)
issued its Policy Guidance on the Consideration of Arrest Records in Employment
Decisions Under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.[^/69] The Policy Guidance
states that a business must demonstrate a compelling business justification for
using arrest records. Moreover, "_a business justification can rarely be demonstrated for
a blanket exclusion on the basis of arrest records_." Employers are strongly cautioned
against making pre-employment inquiries into arrest records because
"_information which is obtained is likely to be used_." An arrest record _per se_ cannot be
used to reject job applicants, but it can be used if it indicates _underlying conduct_
that would satisfy the compelling business justification standard. In other
words, the employer may go behind the fact of arrest and determine whether
the job applicant is likely to have engaged in the conduct for which he or she
was arrested.[^/70]

[^/65]: D.A. Mukamal & P.N. Samuels, _Statutory Limitations on Civil Rights of People with
Criminal Records_, 30 FORDHAM URB. L.J. 1501, 1502 (2003). Eleven states --- Alaska,
Arkansas, California, Illinois, Massachusetts, Michigan, Nebraska, New York, North
Dakota, and Rhode Island --- have statutory prohibitions on employers making arrest
record inquiries. Thirteen other States have done so administratively. Others
require employers to show business necessity in order to obtain such records.

[^/66]: Labour Code of the State of California, Capt. 90, Statutes of 1937, Chapt 3, Art. 3, §432.7:

    No employer, whether a public agency or a private individual or corporation, shall
    ask an applicant for employment to disclose, through any written form or verbally,
    information concerning an arrest or detention that did not result in conviction, or
    information concerning a referral to, and participation in, any pre-trial or post-trial
    diversion program, nor shall any employer seek from any source whatsoever, or
    utilise, as a factor in determining any condition of employment including hiring,
    promotion, termination, or any apprenticeship training program or any other
    program leading to employment, any record of arrest or detention that did not
    result in conviction, or any record regarding a referral to and participation in, any
    pre-trial or post-trial diversion program.

[^/67]: _Gregory v. Litton Systems, Inc._, 316 F. Supp. 401 (U.S. Distt. Ct. California 1970),
modified on other grounds, 472 F.2d 631 (U.S. Ct. App. 9^th^ Cir. 1972).

[^/68]: U.S.C. §2000 _et seq._ (2009).

How is an employer to determine whether a job applicant is 'likely' to have
engaged in the conduct for which he was arrested? Obviously, the employer, who
may be handling hundreds of job applications, is not going to expend the time
and money to hold some sort of "hearing" so he can resolve the conflicting stories
of police, witnesses, and the job applicant. Therefore, his operating assumption is
likely to be that a person who is arrested for a criminal offense likely engaged in
the conduct for which he was arrested. Minnesota provides that the Department
of Human Services shall determine, by a preponderance of evidence, whether an
applicant applying for a job requiring contact with children committed the crime
for which he was arrested (but not ultimately convicted), thereby rendering the
applicant ineligible.[^/71]

The second question that the employer has to face is no easier to resolve:
when is there a compelling relationship between alleged criminal conduct and
the job he is seeking to fill? The employer might plausibly take the position that
all employees must be reliable, honest, and self-disciplined. No matter what the
specific job responsibilities, an employee who is dishonest and unreliable can
cause problems. In addition, an employer could easily evade the EEOC Policy by
explaining his decision not to offer employment to a previously arrested applicant
on some pretextual ground (e.g., the job applicant lacked the right experience, had
an unstable work history, failed the interview, etc.) or the employer could explain
his failure to make an offer of employment to Applicant A by saying that he
simply preferred Applicant B's experience and personality. Thus, a prohibition
on employment discrimination on the basis of prior arrest(s) will be extremely
difficult to enforce.

[^/69]: _See_, Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Policy Guidance on Consideration
of Arrest Records in Employment Decisions Under title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964, as amended, 42 U.S.C. sec. 2000 _et seq._ (1990), _available at_, 1990 WL 1104708.

[^/70]: The EEOC offers the following example of an arrest being relevant to the hiring
decision. A black male applicant for a position as a police officer had been acquitted
of burglary, but admitted to his employer that he actually did commit the crime.
The EEOC notes that the police department's decision not to hire the applicant
would be justified because the applicant's ability to testify in court as a credible
witness would be severely damaged.

[^/71]: J. Brennan and M. Haase, _Minnesota Reforms Address Important Employer Liability and
Notification Issues_, 13(3) OFFENDER PROC. REP., 42 (2009). _See also_, _U.S. v. Lope_, 704 F.
Supp. 1055 (U.S. Dist. Ct. S.D. Florida. 1988) (licensing board for private investigators
should have access to arrest record).

# CONCLUSION

There are more than 10,000 police departments in the U.S.; practically every
city and town has its own police department. It is no small challenge to keep
track of arrestees, criminal defendants, convicted offenders and ex-offenders. The
U.S. rap sheet system was established for the convenience of police agencies long
before there were computers. It rapidly became a critical source of information
for prosecutors, courts, probation, and parole agencies and other criminal justice
system actors and agencies. Over time public and private employers, schools,
social welfare agencies and numerous other agencies and individuals began to
use criminal history information in their decision-making. The IT revolution made
it possible to connect the whole system on a nationwide basis and made retrieval
practically instantaneous. We now have to face such questions as whether the
system collects and disseminates too much information and, if so, what can be
done about it?

This article focuses just on arrest records and intelligence files. Arguably,
unlike conviction records, neither type of information should harm an individual's
reputation or opportunities. Most people would probably agree that the simple
fact that a person has been arrested should not result in negative consequences.
Unfortunately, however, this is not the case. An arrest record can have devastating
consequences for the individual. While arrest records are not aggressively
disseminated to the public, they are now available from many sources. It's not
clear what, if anything, can be done. Once the genie has been let out of the bottle,
it is very hard to see how it can be rebottled. Indeed, because of a confluence of
factors --- an arrest-based criminal history system, open court records, private
information vendors --- it may be too late for the U.S. to effectively remediate the
negative effects of arrest records.

The situation with respect to intelligence files and databases is a little more
hopeful, but just a little. Intelligence files and databases are not nearly as well
developed, coordinated and comprehensive as rap sheets. At least until recently,
the police maintained intelligence files on only a small number of people and then
only for a small number of threats. But the lure of computer technology has
proved irresistible. It is so easy to create new databases --- suspected terrorists,
suspected organised crime members, suspected gang members, suspected
immigration law violators. The list is likely to expand inexorably. While the
contents of these databases are not nearly as publicly accessible as rap sheets,
including arrest records, they are becoming more accessible. Federal, state and
local law enforcement agencies' need for such information generates powerful
pressure to provide each other access to databases. But a system operated to fulfil
that goal is likely also to be a system that provides wide access and is not effectively
secured against unauthorised users and hackers.
