# Introduction

Modern co-operative movement was formally introduced in India in
1904 with the promulgation of the Co-operative Societies Act. Initially,
it was confined mainly to agricultural credit; its objective was to free
the peasants from the exploitation by money-lenders, by providing the
former with alternative sources of credit. Since 1904 the number of co-operatives and their membership and capital investment have grown
many times. Gradually, the co-operative activity was also extended to
several other spheres such as marketing, processing, farming, banking
and housing.

A distinctive feature of modern co-operatives is that they are
organised on the basis of certain principles, the most important of
which, from the sociologist's point of view, are equality among
members and the democratic principle in management. It is well-known
that the caste system was one of the major bases of the organization of
the traditional Indian society, and it continues to be important in many
spheres of life even in modern times. The individuals acquired their
caste by birth and the system was characterized by a certain hierarchy
among the different caste groups based mainly on the principle of purity
and pollution. The system not only implied superiority of certain groups
over others in the social, economic and political fields, but it also
underlined the acceptance of superiority and inequality by the other
groups irrespective of the fact that the different unequal groups co-operated
with each other in different spheres of life. It would appear,
then, that the basic principles underlying the caste system and the co-operative
movement are inconsistent with each other. The same is the
case of the relation between caste system and parliamentary democracy
based on adult franchise.

A number of social scientists have analysed the role of caste in
politics.[^/1] Some of them have also examined its role in the economic
field.[^/2] Although co-operative activity is a part of the wider economic
field, not much work has been done on the relationship between caste
and co-operatives in general and agricultural co-operatives in particular.
The aim of this paper is to analyse the role of caste in a co-operative
sugar factory. In this connection, I would like to discuss the following
questions. How far members of different castes differ in their attitude
towards participation in a particular co-operative activity? What are the
reasons underlying these differences? How far members of different
castes differ in their behaviour while participating in the co-operative
activity? Again, what are the factors underlying these differences? And
finally, what role does caste play in the success or failure of a co-operative
activity? I would like to discuss these questions in relation to
three aspects of the co-operative sugar factory, _viz._, establishment of the
factory, leadership and control of the factory, and industrial relations in
the factory.

# The Background

Maharashtra is considered to be one of the leading states in India in
the co-operative field. Among the twenty-six districts in Maharashtra,
Ahmednagar district in which the factory under study is located, is
recognized as a centre of successful co-operative activity. The district
has an extensive network of primary cooperatives covering almost every
village. Out of twenty eight cooperative sugar factories in the State, this
district alone has eight. The District Central Co-operative Bank of
Ahmednagar is acclaimed as the model not only in Maharashtra but in
other States as well. The district has also a co-operative sale--purchase
union which is the second largest in the State with an annual turnover of
about seven crores of rupees.

The whole district, although characterized by a rich soil, was once a
famine stricken area due to inadequate and uncertain rains. The
completion of irrigation canals from the Godavari and Pravara rivers in
1916 and 1922 respectively was a major landmark in the process of
economic development of the region. The canals brought about a shift
from the subsistence to cash crops, the principal among the latter being
sugarcane. Ahmednagar leads all other districts in Maharashtra in
sugarcane production in terms of both acreage as well as yield per acre.
There are thirteen sugar factories in the district, eight of which are co-operatives
while the remaining five are joint stock companies. These factories together provide regular
employment to over thirteen thousand workers and crush over 25 lakh
tons of sugarcane annually. The surplus sugarcane, if any, left with the
grower, is converted into _gur_ (jaggery) by the grower himself. The
social, economic and political life in the district, particularly in its
northern part, revolves mainly around cultivation of sugarcane and
manufacture of sugar and _gur_.

Most of the castes found in Maharashtra are represented in
Ahmednagar district. Prominent among them are the Brahmin, the
cultivator castes of Maratha, Mali, Dhangar and Vanjari, the artisan and
servicing castes such as Carpenter, Blacksmith, Barber, and
Washerman, and the ex-Untouchable castes such as Mahar, Chambhar
and Mang. Since 1956, following the call of the late Dr. B. R.
Ambedkar, the majority of the Mahars have converted themselves to
Buddhism and are now called Neo-Buddhists. Maratha is the 'dominant
caste'[^/3] in the region. They are numerically preponderant and enjoy
economic and political power as well as a high, though not the highest,
ritual status.

Modern sugar industry started in India at the beginning of this
century, but it made a real headway only after 1932 when the
Government imposed a protective duty on the import of sugar. Five
sugar factories were established in Ahmednagar district within a period
of about ten years after 1932. They were organized as joint stock
companies controlled mainly by the Marwari and Gujarati industrialists
from Bombay. However, the establishment of these factories did not
contribute much to the improvement in the economic condition of the
local sugarcane growers. It was felt by the local peasant leaders and
enlightened co-operators that the establishment of a sugar factory on a
co-operative basis was the only way to improve the lot of the sugarcane
growers who had suffered due to fluctuations in the _gur_ market and
exploitation by the joint stock sugar factories. Although the efforts in
this direction were begun in 1946, the first factory was established only
in 1950. It was the first successful co-operative sugar factory not only in
Maharashtra but also in the country as a whole. The factory that I have
studied was established in 1953 --- the second in the series --- and it went
into production in 1955--56. I shall call this factory _Kisan_ (a
pseudonym).

# The Factory

_Kisan_ is located near a village in Kopargaon taluka of Ahmednagar
district. There are six sugar factories in the taluka, three of which are co-operatives
and the rest joint stock companies. The shareholders of _Kisan_
(1,044 in June 1963) are sugarcane growers spread over 59 villages in
the 'area of operation' of the factory. Most of them belong to the local
peasant castes, mainly Maratha, Mali and Karekar. Among them the
locally dominant Marathas constitute over 60 per cent of the
shareholders (see Table 1). The Malis, who constitute 13.7 per cent, are
numerically next to the Marathas. The former migrated from the
neighbouring Poona district to this area after the completion of the
irrigation canals and are recognized as the pioneers in sugarcane
cultivation. The Malis are relatively well-to-do among the shareholders
of _Kisan_, a fact reflected in the proportion of the shares held by them
(see Table 2). It is important to note that the majority of the
shareholders --- over 60 per cent --- are small growers with not more than
three acres of land under sugarcane.

+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Caste                | Small (1–6)† | Medium (7–19)† | Large (20–50)† | Total | Percentage of the total shareholders |
+======================+=============:+===============:+===============:+======:+=====================================:+
| Maratha              | 387          | 208            | 32             | 27    | 60.0                                 |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Mali                 | 49           | 66             | 28             | 43    | 13.7                                 |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Karekar              | 100          | 21             | 4              | 25    | 11.9                                 |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Brahmin              | 31           | 15             | 4              | 50    | 4.8                                  |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Dbangar              | 15           | 2              |                | 17    | 1.6                                  |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Vanjari              | 12           | 4              | 1              | 17    | 1.6                                  |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Marwari Bania        | 7            | 3              |                | 10    | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Lingayat Wani        | 6            | 3              | 1              | 10    | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Mahar (Neo-Buddhist) | 8            | 1              |                | 9     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Chambbar             | 6            | 2              |                | 8     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Dhobi                | 3            | 4              |                | 7     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Gujarati Bania       |              | 1              | 2              | 3     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Lonari               | 1            | 1              |                | 2     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Koli                 | 1            | 1              |                | 2     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Bajragi              | 2            |                |                | 2     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Sutar                | 1            |                |                | 1     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Vadar                |              | 1              |                | 1     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Muslim               | 4            | 4              |                | 8     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| Public bodies        | 1            | 1              |                | 2     | ‡                                    |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
| TOTAL                | 634          | 338            | 72             | 1044  | 100.0                                |
+----------------------+--------------+----------------+----------------+-------+--------------------------------------+
:Table 1: Distribution of shareholders by their caste and size of shareholding.

† Size of shareholding

‡ All combined accounts for 6.4%

\ 

_**NOTE**: Each share is of the value of Rs. 500. The shareholder is obliged
to supply sugarcane to the factory at the rate of ½ acre of sugarcane
per share held by him._

+-----------------------+----------+-------+----------+----------+---------+------------------+
| Size of share-holding | Maratha† | Mali† | Karekar† | Brahmin† | Others† | All shareholders |
+=======================+=========:+======:+=========:+=========:+========:+=================:+
| Small (1--6)          | 61.8     | 34.2  | 80.0     | 62.0     | 67.4    | 60.7             |
+-----------------------+----------+-------+----------+----------+---------+------------------+
| Medium (7--19)        | 33.1     | 46.2  | 16.8     | 30.0     | 28.3    | 32.4             |
+-----------------------+----------+-------+----------+----------+---------+------------------+
| Large (20--50)        | 5.1      | 19.6  | 3.2      | 8.0      | 4.3     | 6.9              |
+-----------------------+----------+-------+----------+----------+---------+------------------+
| TOTAL                 | 100.0    | 100.0 | 100.0    | 100.0    | 100.0   | 100.0            |
+-----------------------+----------+-------+----------+----------+---------+------------------+
| N                     | (627)    | (143) | (125)    | (50)     | (99)    | (1,044)          |
+-----------------------+----------+-------+----------+----------+---------+------------------+
:Table 2: Distribution of shareholders of important castes according to their shareholding.

† Caste

\ 

The management of the factory vests in the Board of Directors ---
thirteen in all --- elected from amongst the shareholders. The elected
members of the Board may co-opt two additional members as experts.
As considerable prestige, material gains, and power of patronage are
associated with the position of a director, there is intense competition
among the local peasant leaders to become directors of the factory. The
directors often try to use the resources of the factory to strengthen their
position in local politics. The leading directors have been closely
associated with the local units of political parties, particularly the ruling
Congress Party and the factions within it.

In 1963--64, when field-work for this study was carried out, _Kisan_
employed 885 workers including the supervisory and managerial staff.
Among them, 450 workers were permanent and the rest seasonal. The
majority of the workers were semi-skilled and unskilled. About 30 per
cent of the workers were local, in the sense that they came from the 59
villages in the area of operation of the factory. Most of the local workers
had caste, kinship and village ties with shareholders and directors. There
were only 92 workers who came from other States, mainly Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar. The numerically significant caste groups among
the workers were Marathas (258), Neo-Buddhists (148), Brahmins (72), Dhangars (28),
Malis (17), and Karekars (16). The remaining 346 workers were
distributed in small numbers among a large number of castes and
among Christians and Muslims. There was a broad correlation between
the caste affiliation of a worker and the nature of the job held by him.
The Brahmins were engaged mainly in the clerical, skilled and
supervisory work, while the Neo-Buddhists were engaged mainly in
unskilled and semi-skilled work. The Marathas were found in all the
occupational categories.

The factory works for about 200 days in a year. It has a crushing
capacity of 1,200 tons per day. It crushes annually over two lakh tons of
sugarcane supplied by the shareholders and produces over 23,000 tons
of sugar. In economic terms, the factory has been a great success. It has
paid all its 'block capital' loans, amounting to forty lakhs of rupees, four
years in advance of the stipulated date. In addition, it has created
permanent assets worth more than a crore of rupees. Recently, it has
been granted expansion in its crushing capacity to 1,750 tons a day. It
has been able to pay increasingly higher price for the sugarcane supplied
by shareholders. Starting with a rate of only 37.25 rupees per ton of
sugar-cane in the first year (1955--56), it paid 61.25 rupees per ton during the
year of my field-work (1963--64). In 1967--68, it was able to pay 169.50
rupees per ton. Furthermore, through its extension services, it has
helped the shareholders, directly or indirectly, to increase the yield of
sugarcane. The average yield of cane per acre cultivated by the
shareholders increased from 36.4 tons in 1955--56 to 54.8 tons in 1965--66.
During the last ten years the factory has constructed and maintained
a network of roads in its area of operation. For its workers and staff, it
has developed a small township with many modern civic amenities. It
has also helped to start and maintain two colleges and five secondary
schools in the area. In short, the factory has contributed a great deal to
the transformation of economic and social life in the surrounding area. It
also occupies an important place in the local politics.

# Establishment of the Factory

The initiative for the establishment of the factory came from Kaka, a
local Maratha leader. He had been active in organizing a number of co-operative
societies of different types in the region for over 25 years.
Through this work he had also built up good contacts with influential
co-operators and various officials in the co-operative field in the State.

When Kaka started collecting the share capital for the proposed factory
in 1948, he realized that he could not do it with the support of the
Marathas only, and the support of the other castes was essential.
Although the Marathas were numerically preponderant, the majority of
them being small growers did not have enough resources for becoming
shareholders. Kaka did not find it easy to enlist the support of the other
castes. His proposal was strongly opposed by the rich Marwari and
Gujarati Bania traders who considered it a threat to their vested interest,
_viz._, their trade in _gur_. They also tried to dissuade the minority castes of
Malis and Karekars from buying shares of the proposed factory. The
latter were even otherwise not very enthusiastic about Kaka's proposal.
The cane growers of these castes had retained close links with the local
traders for meeting their credit needs even after co-operative credit
societies had been established in the region. They feared that the new
factory, like the other-co-operatives, would be dominated by the
numerically strong Marathas. They were also suspicious of Kaka
who had earlier antagonised these groups. The traders were opposed to
Kaka because he had already undermined their monopoly in the local
market by organizing a co-operative sale and purchase union. He had
come into conflict with the Karekars in neighbouring villages due to
disputes over ownership of land and distribution of canal waters. The
Malis were opposed to him because he had earlier campaigned against
their getting lands on lease from the local Maratha landowners and also
against the irrigation facilities enjoyed by them. As immigrants,
dependent mainly on sugarcane cultivation, the Malis felt insecure with
the increasing influence of Kaka whom they considered an open protagonist
of the local Maratha peasants.

The opposition of the Malis to the establishment of the factory is
worth noting as it brings out the relevance of the caste factor. Their
opposition did not arise from any doubts about the utility of the
proposed factory. In fact, they were the first among the sugarcane
growers to realize the need for starting a sugar factory instead of being
at the mercy of the fluctuating _gur_ market. They had established a
factory of their own in the neighbouring district on similar lines in the
thirties although it was not registered as a cooperative. All the
shareholders in that factory were Malis. Their opposition to Kaka's
proposal arose mainly out of the fear of increasing domination by the
Marathas.

The new proposal required both share capital and an adequate
acreage of cane with the shareholders. The Malis had both. They were
bigger cane growers and also possessed resources to buy shares. But the
indifference and, to some extent, hostility on the part of the Malis and
other minority castes frustrated Kaka. He had to give up the idea of
starting a sugar co-operative and return whatever money he had
collected from the people.

In the meanwhile, another Maratha leader succeeded in starting a
sugar co-operative in a neighbouring taluka in 1950, which was the first
factory of its kind in the State. This inspired Kaka to make another
attempt and this time he succeeded. A number of factors contributed to
his success. In order to allay the suspicions of the trading and other
minority castes, Kaka persuaded a local Marwari Bania trader to
become one of the promoters of the factory. Two announcements by the
State Government also helped him; first, the policy of favouring the
licensing of sugar factories in the cooperative sector, and second, the
policy of disallowing the sugar-cane growers in the canal-irrigated areas from cultivating more than six
acres of cane. However, those who joined a co-operative sugar factory
were to be exempted from this rule and to be allowed to cultivate upto
25 acres of cane. As most of the Malis were big cane growers they saw
the threat to their cane growing operations and joined the factory as
shareholders without any delay. Thus, Kaka succeeded in collecting
enough share capital to register the proposed factory as a co-operative,
and the factory was soon erected.

It is significant to note that the initiative and leadership in the
establishment of _Kisan_ emerged from the dominant group of the
Marathas. This was true of most of the sugar co-operatives in
Maharashtra. Members belonging to the other castes have rarely taken a
leading part in starting such ambitious co-operative ventures.
Organizing a big co-operative such as a sugar factory required
mobilization of human and material resources on a large scale. The
leaders of the dominant caste were in a better position than the others to
mobilize such resources. The minority caste groups were not as
enthusiastic in starting _Kisan_ as the Marathas were. This was more out
of fear of growth of power of the dominant caste and not so much due
to any doubts regarding the economic and other advantages of joining
such ventures. The minority castes joined _Kisan_ ultimately when they
realized that they could not prevent its emergence.

# Leadership and Control of the Factory

The authority in the factory vests in the Board of Directors which
takes all important policy decisions. The directors are elected by the
shareholders, each of whom enjoys an equal number of votes
irrespective of the number of shares held by him. For the first three
years after the establishment of the factory, there was a nominated
Board. Afterwards regular periodical elections have been held. There
had been keen contest in all the elections, except during 1960--62 when
the directors were elected unopposed. I was able to observe the
elections of the Board held in December 1963, and I have also collected
information about all the previous as well as subsequent elections
through other sources.

The history of the struggle for power in _Kisan_ is associated with two
rival factions. Factions are called _gats_ in the local language, and each
_gat_ is known by the name of its main leader. Each faction puts up a separate 'panel' of candidates and approaches the voters for
supporting the panel as a whole. Each faction is led by a Maratha. Its
members are, however, drawn from all the castes among the
shareholders though not in equal proportion. Over a period of time there
has developed a two-party system in _Kisan_ as well as in similar other
structures of power in the area. Nobody comes forward to contest the
elections as an 'independent' candidate outside of the panels put up by
rival factions. The factions function almost on party lines although the
leaders of rival factions may belong to the same political party. The
factions also use the party idiom in their organization and activities. The
terms such as 'parliamentary board,' 'party meeting,' 'party discipline,'
and 'party line' are frequently used by them.

Before 1960, the factions in _Kisan_ were organized largely on the basis
of allegiance to rival political parties. While one faction was led by the
members of the ruling Congress Party, the other was led by the
members of the opposition parties, mainly the Peasants and Workers
Party and the Communist Party. After 1960, most of the opposition
leaders joined the Congress. For a period of two or three years there was
complete unity in the Board of _Kisan_ as well as in the boards of other
co-operatives in the area. As a result, there were no contests in the
elections to the different boards. Candidates were approved by the
leaders and they were elected unopposed during this 'period of unity', as
local people refer to it. At the end of 1962, serious differences
developed among the leaders and two rival factions re-emerged, by and
large pitting the 'old' Congressmen against the new entrants to the party.
I do not discuss here the factors contributing to the unity and those
leading to the reappearance of the split, as I do not consider it relevant
for this paper.

The candidates are selected by the rival factions mainly on the basis
of their 'vote-catching' ability. Formal education or other qualifications
for managing the affairs of the factory are secondary. Both the factions
try to give proportional representation to the different caste groups
among the shareholders. Over a period of time a convention has
developed that the minority castes of Malis and Karekars should have at
least two directors on the Board. The Brahmins are given one seat as
they have a smaller number of shareholders. Members of other minority
castes, who do not have many shareholders, may get a representation
occasionally if there is an influential leader among them. The candidates are selected by the
respective 'parliamentary boards' of the rival factions. However, the
selection of representatives from the minority castes is made in
consultation with the acknowledged leaders of those castes within the
faction. The factions also try to distribute their tickets evenly among the
different villages, depending on the number of shareholders in them.

All the candidates of a faction pool their resources and organize the
campaign jointly. However, the candidates of the minority castes tend to
approach the voters belonging to their castes individually. The issues in
the campaign are not confined to those connected with the affairs of the
factory. The actions of the rival factions in the factory as well as in other
co-operatives, _panchayat bodies_ and similar other structures are
criticized during the campaign. The leading personalities and their
actions are also subjected to criticism. However, the issues of any kind
are not so decisive in influencing the voters. What matters most is the
personal following of the leaders based on previous obligations and
future promises. Politics at this level is 'a system of reciprocal personal
obligations' as described by Whyte in his study of Cornerville (1943:
240).

Voting is by and large on factional line. Usually more than 95 per
cent of the members exercise their franchise. Normally the panel as a
whole wins or loses. This does not mean that there are no differences in
the votes polled by individual candidates in the same panel. Some
candidates get more votes than the others in the same panel due to their
personal following or popularity among the voters. The candidates
belonging to the minority castes often get more votes than the Marathas
in the same panel as the minority caste voters tend to vote for their
castemen across the panel. As a result, sometimes a minority caste may
get slightly over-represented. Such a tendency is, however, criticized by
the leaders of the dominant caste.

After the election of directors, the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman
of the factory are elected by the directors from amongst themselves.
Here again, barring one or two exceptions, the Chairmanship has always
gone to a Maratha and the Vice-Chairmanship to one of the minority
caste leaders, either a Mali or a Karekar.

The elections are often influenced by events remotely connected with
the management of the factory. The strength of the rival factions in the
District Central Co-operative Bank, other co-operative sugar factories in the district, co-operative sale--purchase unions,
the _panchayat raj_ bodies, the Congress party, and the State cabinet,
influences the fortunes of rival groups in the factory. Thus, control over
these other organizations helps a faction to secure control over the
factory. And control over the factory, in turn, helps a faction to secure
control over the other organizations.[^/4]

Since the factions are multi-caste alliances, they do not fight with
each other on caste lines or caste issues. This is because factions, and
not castes, form the basis of organization, competition and rivalry; and
they operate more with the objective of capturing power in the co-operatives
than for any ideological considerations. The caste factor
enters into the 'calculus' for achieving this objective. Caste is relevant
here to the extent that the rival factions are led by the leaders belonging
to the dominant Maratha caste and they try to secure support of all the
numerically significant castes among the shareholders. In the process,
almost all the castes are divided, though not equally, along factional
line. The leaders realize the importance of caste in voting and try to
provide representation to different castes in proportion to their
numerical strength. The candidates belonging to the minority castes
appeal to their castemen on the basis of caste loyalty. The Marathas
continue to dominate in spite of the divisions among them, mainly
because of their decisive numerical strength as compared to the other
castes. They have also the advantage of having links with other
Marathas who are powerful in other co-operatives, in the Congress Party
and in the Government. This creates in them a tremendous sense of
confidence. Much of the recent progress in the co-operative field in
Maharashtra is due to the bold actions of the Maratha leaders in
different parts of the State who have far more political resources at their
disposal than the leaders of the minority castes.

# Industrial Relations

The relations among the _Kisan_ workers themselves, between the
workers and the union, and between workers and the union on the one
hand and the management on the other, were influenced largely by the
divisions among the workers on the basis of 'locality', political party
and, to some extent, caste. The caste background of the workers and the
divisions of 'local' and 'outsiders' among them have already been
mentioned. The employment of a large number of 'outside' workers, many of whom belonged to the castes other than
those of the shareholders, needs an explanation. A large number of
unskilled and semi-skilled workers were employed in the factory in
1953 when it was being erected. Initially, wages and working conditions
were not sufficiently attractive for local labour to seek employment in it.
The management also discouraged the recruitment of local labour for
fear that it would create scarcity of agricultural labour and adversely
affect sugarcane cultivation in the area. The senior officials of the
factory having influence over the recruitment of workers were mainly
Brahmins from outside the area. They too favoured the appointment of
'outside' workers in the hope that they would be more obedient as
compared to local workers who had access to the directors and
shareholders. The outside workers, in turn, took avidly to employment in
_Kisan_. The ex-Untouchables were attracted by the prospect of regular
employment free from the disabilities of village society. The workers
from Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, who had an experience of working in
sugar factories elsewhere, joined _Kisan_ because it offered relatively
better jobs and higher wages on account of their past experience.

The Taluka Sugar Workers Union (_TSU_), affiliated to Hind Mazdoor
Sabha (_HMS_), enjoys the legal status of the 'representative' union for all
the six sugar factories in Kopargaon taluka. There are close links
between the _TSU_ and the local branch of the Praja Socialist Party
(_PSP_). The _Kisan_ branch of the _TSU_ is active since the factory went
into production. The outside workers largely belonging to the minority
castes were the first to join the union and constituted the hard core of its
supporters. The composition of the _TSU_'s membership in _Kisan_
influenced significantly the management's attitude towards the union.
More than 60 per cent of the workers in _Kisan_ had been organized by
the _TSU_. The proportion of union members was more among the
unskilled and semi-skilled workers than among the employees of higher
categories. Similarly, it was higher among the ex-Untouchables and
other minority castes than among the locally dominant Maratha caste.
Moreover, the outside workers were proportionately more than the local
ones in the union. For instance, almost all the workers from Uttar
Pradesh and Bihar were loyal members of the union. The main reason
for this situation was that while the local workers, particularly from the
dominant and other peasant castes, could count on their caste, kinship and village ties with the shareholders and
directors to safeguard their interests, the other workers had to depend
exclusively on the union strength. The local workers resented the
dominance of outsiders in the union and felt that the union
discriminated against them.

The major source of friction within the union and also between the
union and the management was the existence of a large number of
outside workers. It may be mentioned here that to provide employment
to the local people was also one of the objectives in starting the co-operative
sugar factories. However, the outside workers were recruited
in the initial period for the reasons stated above. Soon after the initial
period was over, there was considerable improvement in the wages and
working conditions of workers. As a result, the local people began
pressing the directors for jobs in the factory. At this stage, the
management could not recruit new workers without removing the old
ones. It also realized that any such attempt on its part would be strongly
opposed by the union. The management also resented the close
association between the _TSU_ and the _PSP_ as most of the directors were
members of the Congress Party.

In order to deal with this situation the directors decided to sponsor a
union which would co-operate with the management and be closer to the
Congress. They encouraged the local workers to establish a rival union
affiliated to the Indian National Trade Union Congress (_INTUC_)
controlled by the Congress. The emergence of the 'company union'
sharpened the division among the workers. The loyal supporters of the
_TSU_ who stood by it during this period were mostly outside workers
including those from the other States. The Maharashtrians among them
were mostly ex-Untouchables or belonged to other minority castes. The
open supporters of the _INTUC_ union were mostly local workers
belonging to the peasant castes. Many of them had close ties with the
shareholders and directors.

The rivalry between the two unions led the _INTUC_ and the
management to take a bold step having far reaching consequences for
both the unions. The step involved the removal of 105 workers by the
management on the advice of the _INTUC_ leaders. All these workers
were loyal supporters of the _TSU_. Over 90 per cent of them were
outsiders and the overwhelming majority of them consisted of ex-Untouchables.
The vacancies arising out of the removal
of these workers were filled up by appointing local men mostly
belonging to the peasant castes and connected with the shareholders and
directors through caste, kinship and village ties. All of them joined the
_INTUC_.[^/5]

The _TSU_ fought the cases of the dismissed workers in the court and
succeeded in getting them reinstated. This boosted the confidence of
the _TSU_ and weakened the hold of the _INTUC_. The directors also lost
interest in the latter and wondered if they did a right thing in interfering
in the union matters. The _INTUC_ soon became a defunct body.
Although this has strengthened the _TSU_, it does not mean that it is
completely secure in its position. The Neo-Buddhist workers in the
factory are constantly under pressure from the Republican Party,
founded by the late Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, to secede from the _TSU_ and
form a union of their own. The ruling faction in the management has
been encouraging this move.

Thus, we find that 'locality' and, to some extent, caste were the two
important factors which determined the workers' affiliation to the rival
unions. They were also the major source of friction in the union's
relationship with the management. The conflict between the _TSU_ and
the management was accentuated due to their association with rival
political parties.

# Summary and Conclusion

The fact that the sugarcane growers belonged to the different castes
influenced the course of the establishment of the factory. While the
dominant Marathas were keen to start the factory the minority castes
were hesitant to join hands with them. Their hesitation was not due to
any doubts about the economic utility of such a venture. They were
quite aware of the benefits derived from joining a sugar co-operative,
but they feared it would make the Marathas more powerful and
dominant. They joined the factory ultimately when they realised that
they could not prevent its emergence.

The fear of the minority castes was not entirely imaginary. The
Marathas do dominate the affairs of the factory and, to some extent, it
has added to their power as compared to the other castes. The Marathas
enjoy cumulative advantages. Controlling the factory helps them in
controlling other organizations which, in turn, helps them to retain their
hold over the factory. However, the minority castes are helped, to some extent, by the factional division
among the Marathas. The former try to take advantage of this in
securing greater representation in the Board and in getting their voice
heard. They also try to achieve this objective by voting in favour of
their own caste candidates across the panel.

Caste is one of the factors influencing the workers' attitude and
behaviour towards the union and management in _Kisan_. The local
workers belonging to peasant castes, preferably Maratha, and having
kinship ties with shareholders and directors, feel more secure in their
jobs and entertain greater hopes of rising in their career in the factory.
This does not, however, mean that caste decides everything in one's
favour. Factional divisions among directors may at times harm the
interests of the local workers. For the other workers, the union is the
main protector of their interests.

Thus, we find that although caste divisions among shareholders,
directors and workers influence their attitudes and behaviour in certain
ways, it has not affected the successful working of the factory. The
factory was established in spite of reservations on the part of the
minority castes. The Board manages to function on democratic lines and
a smooth transfer of power has taken place between the rival factions in
spite of the divisions among directors on caste lines. The very fact that
the rival factions are multi-caste alliances is an indication that caste
plays a minor part in their organization. Similarly, the existence of the
_TSU_ has helped to create a certain sense of security among the workers
who do not belong to the dominant caste or who do not have supporters
in the management. Seen in this perspective, it would appear that the
traditional institution of caste has not prevented the successful working
of a cooperative. The latter, it is true, had to make an adjustment with
the former in the given environment. This finding goes against those
who believe that caste is a major barrier in the process of economic
development, industrialization and the growth of democratic institutions
in the so-called traditional Indian society.

I would like to say a word about the role of dominant caste in this
process. It cannot be denied that the ventures like _Kisan_ have emerged
and succeeded largely due to the dynamic leadership provided by the
Marathas. This contribution of the Marathas is facilitated by the fact that
they enjoy a decisive dominance in the social, economic and political
fields. The Marathas control not only the co-operatives but also the _panchayat bodies_, the ruling party, and
through it the State Government. Their position of power in wider
politics has helped them to take a successful lead in co-operatives. This
leading position of the Marathas certainly bestows greater benefits and
advantages to them. In the process, however, other caste groups also
gain something. This gain would not have accrued to them without the
leadership of the Marathas. A point may be raised here whether this
process will not widen the gap between the Marathas and the others.
Will this not make the Marathas more powerful? It may be argued that
co-operatives should aim at safeguarding the interests of the weaker
sections in the society and should strive to improve their lot. They
should not, at least, make stronger those who are already strong. The
answer to this argument would be that the establishment of equality
among the different sections in a society cannot be achieved only or
mainly through co-operatives. It has to be achieved on several fronts
through many other measures. I would also like to point out that the role
of dominant caste in the social, economic and political development of
Indian society still awaits a fuller analysis. A point may be raised
whether co-operatives like _Kisan_ are not permeated with a kind of
capitalist spirit. Without going into a detailed discussion, I would say
that the study of _Kisan_ does not support such a conclusion. One has to
compare here the part played by the co-operative sugar factories in the
life of the people in the area with that played by the private sector
factories which have existed for a much longer period in the same area.
The observation that these co-operatives are capitalistic in spirit is often
based on a partial view of their being dominated by a few well-to-do
peasants and the intense struggle for power which goes on in them. If
one viewed the functions performed by these co-operatives in their
totality one may not reach such a hasty conclusion.[^/6]

# References

::: {#refs}

**Bailey, F. G.**

\ 

1957 _Caste and the Economic Frontier_. Manchester: Manchester University
Press.

\ 

1963 _Politics and Social Change: Orissa in 1959_. Bombay: Oxford Univer
sity Press.

\ 

**Baviskar, B. S.**

\ 

1968a Union Politics and Management Politics. _Indian Journal of Industrial
Relations_, 3 : 300--15.

\ 

1968b Co-operatives and Politics. _Economic and Political Weekly_, III: 490--95.

\ 

**Beteille, Andre**

\ 

1969 Caste and Politics in Tamilnad. _In_ his, _Castes: Old and New_. Bombay:
Asia Publishing House.

\ 

**Epstein, T. S.**

\ 

1962 _Economic Development and Social Change in South India_. Bombay:
Oxford University Press.

\ 

**Mayer, A. C.**

\ 

1967 Caste and Local Politics in India. _In_ Philip Mason (ed.), _India and
Ceylon: Unity and Diversity_. London: Oxford University Press.

\ 

**Rao, M. S. A.**

\ 

1964 Caste and the Indian Army. _Economic Weekly_, XVI: 1439--43.

\ 

1968 Political Elite and Caste Association.  _Economic and Political Weekly_,
III: 779--82.

\ 

**Srinivas, M. N.**

\ 

1959 The Dominant Caste in Rampura. _American Anthropologist_, 61: 1--16

\ 

1962 Caste in Modern India. _In_ his, _Caste in Modern India and Other Essays_.
Bombay: Asia Publishing House.

\ 

**Whyte, W. F.**

\ 

1943 _Street Corner Society_. Chicago: Chicago University Press.

:::



[^/1]: Some of the important studies on this theme are: Srinivas (1962), Bailey (1963),
Beteille (1969), Mayer (1967), and Rao (1964 and 1968).

[^/2]: The contributions of Bailey (1957) and Epstein (1962) are significant in this field.

[^/3]: The Marathas are dominant in the area in the sense in which Srinivas (1959) uses
the term.

[^/4]: I have discussed in another paper (1968b) the part played by co-operatives in
Maharashtra politics. It is also discussed in detail in my ''Factions and Party Politics:
General Elections in an Assembly Constituency in Maharashtra", in a forthcoming
volume being edited by M. N. Srinivas and A. M. Shah at the University of Delhi.

[^/5]: I have discussed these developments in greater detail elsewhere (1968a).

[^/6]: This is a revised version of a paper presented at the Conference on the Social
Prerequisites for Agricultural Co-operation organized by the Institute of Development Studies,
University of Sussex, Brighton, March--April, 1969. I thank the
Institute for giving me an opportunity to participate in the Conference. I am grateful
to Professor R. P. Dore of the Institute for many acts of kindness. Professor M.S.A.
Rao guided me, through all the stages, while making this study. Professor A. M.
Shah made valuable suggestions on the earlier draft. I am grateful to both of them.
